© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any
current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new
collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other
works. DOI: 10.1109/TC.2024.3449082
arXiv:2402.12162v2
[cs.CR]
28
Aug
2024
2
SCARF: Securing Chips with a Robust Framework
against Fabrication-time Hardware Trojans
Mohammad Eslami , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Tara Ghasempouri , Member, IEEE,
Samuel Pagliarini , Member, IEEE
Abstract—The globalization of the semiconductor industry
has introduced security challenges to Integrated Circuits (ICs),
particularly those related to the threat of Hardware Trojans
(HTs) – malicious logic that can be introduced during IC
fabrication. While significant efforts are directed towards ver-
ifying the correctness and reliability of ICs, their security is
often overlooked. In this paper, we propose a comprehensive
framework that integrates a suite of methodologies for both
front-end and back-end stages of design, aimed at enhancing the
security of ICs. Initially, we outline a systematic methodology to
transform existing verification assets into potent security check-
ers by repurposing verification assertions. To further improve
security, we introduce an innovative methodology for integrating
online monitors during physical synthesis – a back-end insertion
providing an additional layer of defense. Experimental results
demonstrate a significant increase in security, measured by our
introduced metric, Security Coverage (SC), with a marginal
rise in area and power consumption, typically under 20%. The
insertion of online monitors during physical synthesis enhances
security metrics by up to 33.5%. This holistic framework offers
a comprehensive defense mechanism across the entire spectrum
of IC design.
Index Terms—IC Design, ASIC, Hardware Trojan Horse,
Verification, Assertions, Online Checkers, DfHT.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE fabrication of an Integrated Circuit (IC) is mostly
performed in a fabless fashion, a model in which the
fabrication of an IC is performed in other places rather than
inside the design house. Globalization has commonly led to
the widespread adoption of this model by most companies,
primarily driven by the impracticality of establishing pro-
prietary fabrication facilities that require substantial financial
investments in the order of billions of dollars. Notably, even
industry leaders such as Apple opt to outsource the fabrication
of their chips to external entities [1]. This strategic approach
highlights the economic sensibility of relying on specialized
foundries for chip production, especially for advanced node
technologies, allowing design houses to channel resources
more efficiently towards innovation and design endeavors.
Nevertheless, while this fabless model offers numerous
advantages, it also comes with a tangible dark side. When
This work was partially supported by the EU through the European Social
Fund in the context of the project “ICT programme”. M. Eslami was also
supported by HARNO (Grant No. 11.4-1/23/1).
M. Eslami, T. Ghasempouri, and S. Pagliarini are with the De-
partment of Computer Systems, Tallinn University of Technology (Tal-
Tech), 12618, Tallinn, Estonia (e-mail: mohammad.eslami@taltech.ee;
tara.ghasempouri@taltech.ee; samuel.pagliarini@taltech.ee)
Samuel Pagliarini is also with the ECE Department at Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA (e-mail: pagliarini@cmu.edu)
the chip is sent to the foundry for fabrication, there will be no
guarantee that the returned chip precisely aligns with the initial
specifications (i.e., it can be modified inside the foundry).
Even small modifications to the chip’s design can compromise
its security and pose potential risks to human life or lead
to financial losses. This modification is commonly referred
to as Hardware Trojan (HT), which is a malicious alteration,
addition, or subtraction to the original design with the intent
to compromise its integrity [2], [3]. The goal of such ma-
nipulations can range from information leakage, functionality
change, performance degradation, or the deliberate reduction
of the chip’s useful lifespan [4], [5]. An HT is composed of
two parts, namely, the trigger and the payload. Trigger, as its
name indicates, is the activation mechanism of the HT, while
the payload is the saboteur function that is executed when
the trigger is activated. The trigger part can be designed to
activate under specific temporal and/or temperature conditions
or through a combination of certain inputs or internal signals of
the chip. A sophisticated attacker strategically sets the trigger
to activate only under extremely rare conditions, thus ensuring
that the HT remains undetected by conventional detection
schemes during normal chip operation [2], [6].
Therefore, design companies should proactively implement
measures to safeguard their chips against fabrication-time
inserted HTs [7]–[10]. Moreover, the importance of this re-
search cannot be emphasized enough. Historically, the primary
focus during the verification stage within design houses has
been on detecting and fixing bugs. Security, which is often
overlooked in hardware development in favor of reliability and
dependability, must no longer be neglected, given the surge in
hardware attacks [11].
Given this scenario, our focus is primarily on enhancing HT
detection by incorporating defensive techniques at different
stages of chip design, both in the front-end and back-end.
This approach is rarely observed in prior works. In this paper,
first, we show how the knowledge generated by verification
engineers, specifically assertions, can be leveraged as valuable
security assets during the front-end stage. These data are
usually utilized to prove that a design is bug-free, and not
used again. Repurposing this knowledge for security purposes
has the potential to yield substantial time and effort savings.
However, relying solely on the reuse of verification data
may not suffice to attain high levels of security. Therefore,
we introduce a complementary technique aimed at enhancing
the security of digital designs, which is the incorporation
of online checkers during the back-end stage of physical
synthesis. The insertion of the online monitors serves a dual
Online Monitors
Back-end
Side Channel
Logic Testing
Front-end
Prevention
Facilitate Detection
Destructive
Non-Destructive
DfHT
Detection
Layout Filling
Obfuscation
Split Manufacturing
HT Countermeasures
Fig. 1. An overview of the HT protection methods. The techniques used in this work are colored in green.
purpose: not only do they aid in HT detection, but they also
act as functional layout fillers. By utilizing the free resources
within the layout, such as gaps and routing resources, these
monitors contribute to restricting the available resources that
an adversary might exploit for inserting HTs. Nonetheless,
adding an online checker is a form of redundancy that may
pose significant design overheads (in terms of timing, area,
power, and performance). Yet, by proposing a smart timing-
and area-aware technique, and performing the checker in-
sertion by leveraging the Engineering Change Order (ECO)
features of commercial CAD tools, we considerably minimize
the overheads in our flow.
This smart technique seeks to make a balance between
heightened security measures and the optimization of resource
utilization, thereby enhancing the overall robustness of digital
designs. Our overall methodology for reusing the verification
data for security purposes, as the first contribution of this work,
is described in our prior work [12]. In this paper, we present
an in-depth description of how we make use of back-end stage
techniques to augment our prior research on IC security.
The remaining sections of the paper are organized as
follows: Section II provides background information on var-
ious techniques against hardware attacks during fabrication
time and reviews related works. Section III explores the
primary motivation behind this work, focusing on transforming
verification assertions into security checkers. In Section IV,
technical details regarding the implementation flow of adding
online checkers during physical synthesis are explained. Ex-
perimental results are presented in Section V. The paper
concludes with Section VI.
II. BACKGROUND
Due to the rising concerns regarding hardware attacks,
design houses try to protect their chips, particularly during
the post-design stages where the environment is not trusted,
and there is limited oversight in the chip fabrication process.
To address this particular oversight, programs such as the
Microelectronics Quantifiable Assurance (MQA) have started
to add traceability to devices and systems. In tandem, security
concerns have also brought the concept of a “Zero Trust”
model, in which all parties, tools, and assets thereof are
considered potentially untrusted. These concepts co-exist with
techniques to improve trust; An overview of the different
protection techniques is shown in Fig. 1. These techniques are
based on the concept of either detecting HTs on the fabricated
chip or preventing the insertion of HTs through Design for
Hardware Trust (DfHT) [13] approaches.
A. Detection Techniques
Once an adversary introduces an HT at fabrication time,
detection becomes exceptionally challenging [14]. Effective
detection techniques must be used after fabrication to counter
this threat. These techniques are mainly based on inspecting
the fabricated chip to ensure that the chip is HT-free. Detec-
tion methods are performed either in a destructive or non-
destructive fashion. In destructive methods, the chip is de-
packaged and each layer is separately inspected using highly
advanced methods to check if any logic is added (or removed)
by an adversary [15].
However, this approach has significant drawbacks. Firstly, it
involves significant time and cost. Secondly, the analyzed chip
is rendered entirely non-operational after inspection, leading
to its destruction. Consequently, this method is limited to
analyzing random samples and is not viable for inspecting
entire lots of chips.
Therefore, non-destructive methods were introduced to an-
alyze the fabricated chips before being distributed in the
market [16]–[22]. These methods are mainly classified into
side-channel analysis and logic testing.
Side-channel analysis techniques concentrate on observing
physical attributes such as power consumption, path delay,
or electromagnetic emanations [16]–[19]. These attributes are
then compared to those of golden chips, which are assumed
to be HT-free.
Logic testing involves applying test stimuli to evaluate
chips, comparing the responses with expected ones precom-
puted through simulation [20]–[22]. Detection relies on de-
tecting changes in chip functionality during testing, and aims
to activate potential HTs within a limited test time. To avoid
detection, attackers create static HTs activated by extremely
rare conditions.
B. DfHT Techniques
In DfHT approaches, the concept is to embed additional
protection logic in order to either aid in detecting the HTs
[23]–[25] or to prevent an adversary from inserting an HT
altogether [26]–[32]. Although complete prevention against
HT insertion remains impossible in practice, efforts have
focused on strategically limiting available chip resources,
Back
End
Test
Netlist
Netlist
Defensive
Techniques
Defensive
Techniques
Physical Synthesis
Logic Synthesis
Defensive
Techniques
RTL
RTL
Trusted Facility (Design House)
Front
End
Layout
Fabrication
Untrusted Facility (Foundry)
Chip
Trusted Facility (Test House)
Fig. 2. Different stages of IC design: The design house and the test house are considered trusted, while the foundry is assumed to be untrusted.
making it exceedingly difficult for adversaries to exploit them
for malicious logic insertion [29]–[32].
When referring to the process of designing an IC, the tasks
are typically divided into two stages: front-end and back-end
[33]. The front-end stage focuses on the initial specification
and creation of the chip’s architecture. This involves tasks
such as specifying the functionality, creating a high-level
design, and simulating the behavior of the design. Hardware
Description Languages (HDLs) like Verilog or VHDL are
commonly used in this stage. Once the front-end design is
complete, the process transitions to the back-end. In this stage,
the focus is on transforming the design into a physical layout
that can be manufactured, and it includes tasks like clock
tree synthesis, place and route, timing closure, and physical
verification.
Due to the distinct characteristics of the front-end and
back-end stages, the approaches employed for HT prevention
vary between the two stages. Front-end engineers may deploy
different obfuscation techniques, such as logic locking [26],
[27], to protect the Intelectual Property (IP) of the design.
In these methods, the design is secured with additional keys,
initiating normal operation only when the correct sequence
of keys is applied. While these techniques were not developed
for HT prevention, it is understood that obfuscating the design
against IP theft perhaps makes the design less evident for an
adversary attempting to insert an HT.
Conversely, prevention methods applied in the back-end
stage focus on protecting the chip layout from potential
attackers within the foundry. One approach is layout filling
which is aimed at restricting available resources, such as gaps
and free routing tracks, to prevent adversaries from inserting
malicious logic [29]–[31]. Another strategy, known as split
manufacturing, involves fabricating one part of the chip in one
foundry and the remainder in a second foundry [34]. Despite
its promise, practical challenges arise, including finding two
companies with compatible manufacturing technology and
managing complex handshakes between the foundries.
In the domain of DfHT, another research track focuses on
developing methods to enhance HT detection [35], [36]. For
this purpose, different types of checkers can be integrated
into the design to sense irregularities and raise awareness in
case of incorrect behavior. These checkers contribute to side-
channel analysis by serving as thermal sensors to magnify
thermal activity, or act as security checkers by introducing
redundancy to the design. This approach aligns with strategies
proposed for enhancing reliability against faults. In some
works, such as [14], alternative methods like functional testing
and side-channel analysis are also considered for facilitating
HT detection. However, in our classification, we view side-
channel analysis and functional testing as primary methods
for HT detection rather than simply facilitating detection.
C. Threat Model
The chip production process involves several stages, as
shown in Fig. 2. Front-end engineers transform the high-
level design description into a gate-level netlist through logic
synthesis. This netlist is then handed to the back-end team,
where engineers adjust it based on specific constraints such
as area, power, and timing. Defensive techniques can be
incorporated into the design by either the front-end or back-
end team to protect against potential threats. The resulting
layout is sent to a foundry for fabrication. After the chip
is received, specific tests are performed on it to verify its
functionality.
In our threat model, we assume the foundry to be an
untrusted facility, where a potential adversary (e.g., a rogue
engineer) may be present. This encompasses fabrication-time
attacks, similar to those explored in prior research, where
malicious modifications to the design are introduced during
the IC manufacturing [37]. Conceptually, a malicious foundry
can incorporate three types of HTs into the layout of an IC:
additive, substitution, and subtractive HTs. Additive HTs in-
volve introducing additional circuit components and/or wiring
into the existing design. Substitution HTs require removing
logic that is replaced by HT circuit components and/or wiring.
Subtractive HTs involve removing circuit components and/or
wiring to alter the behavior of the existing circuit design.
In this work, we only focus on additive HT attacks due to
their significant impact on system behavior, their detectability
through changes in various design characteristics, and the
extensive body of research on this HT type. Design and test
stages, including the design house and test house, are assumed
to be trusted. Front-end and back-end teams implement defen-
sive techniques in the design before sending it for fabrication,
aiming to counter fabrication-time attacks.
Furthermore, we assume the attacker within the foundry
has the capability to insert sophisticated, small, and rarely
activated HTs that can evade side-channel analysis, logic
testing, and simple forms of chip inspection. The attacker,
due to his/her location, has access to the target technology’s
Process Design Kit (PDK) and advanced commercial CAD
tools. Specifically, we focus on functional HTs that alter the
∀ n ∈

nodes(Des) , n =
(
C if functional path exists between (n) and (assertion)
V if functional path does not exist between (n) and (assertion)
(1)
chip’s functionality, allowing their effects to be observed by
comparing internal signals with the expected ones.
D. Related Works
1) Logic Locking: As mentioned before, logic locking is a
key-based technique used to protect the intellectual property of
ICs by obfuscating their functionality. However, this technique
has limitations [38] and has been subject to numerous attacks
that can discover the key value. Attacks such as boolean
Satisfiability (SAT) attacks, removal attacks, and bypass at-
tacks, have demonstrated that logic locking can be vulnerable,
allowing attackers to uncover the key and compromise the
security of the design. A logic locking technique that relies on
a secret key to control circuit functionality is presented in [26].
The secret key becomes crucial for proper circuit operation,
serving as an authentication mechanism. Another methodol-
ogy is presented in [27] to protect gate-level IPs, providing
obfuscation and authentication. This approach modifies the
state-transition function and internal-circuit structure, allowing
normal operation with a predefined enabling sequence or key.
However, it may have limitations against structural analysis-
based attacks as it does not explicitly modify the state space
of the existing Finite State Machine (FSM) [27].
2) Layout Filling: In [29], the authors propose a method
of populating unused spaces with functional cells, creating an
independent combinational circuit for post-fabrication testing
against cell modifications. Nevertheless, a challenge lies in
achieving a high occupation ratio while keeping the design
routable. To overcome this limitation, [31] gives priority
to filling gaps that could potentially be exploited for HT
insertion. However, this strategy may lead to alterations in
the initial routing, posing a risk of violating critical paths due
to rerouting.
Addressing the limitation of user control over placement,
[39] proposes a placing refinement technique in which large
unused layout spaces are segmented. Despite this refinement,
there remains a vulnerability where attackers can reverse the
refinement, creating optimal zones for their malicious logic. In
a different approach presented in [40], a selective placement
method is employed, where sensitive logic is positioned in
denser layout areas, leading to places gaps around less sensi-
tive regions.
Another attempt to mitigate layout vulnerabilities is dis-
cussed in [41], where the authors aim to reduce large gaps by
shifting cells and utilizing the ECO features of commercial
CAD tools. However, this technique often results in worsened
timing, leading to negative timing slack in most cases.
3) Online Monitors: These techniques have been used
widely for reliability and dependability, focusing on Con-
current Error Detection (CED) techniques, which introduce
redundancy through parity codes or hardware duplication,
complemented by a dedicated checker [42]. The approach
in [36] focuses on combining special CED techniques and
selective programmability to protect digital systems against
HT attacks. However, this method imposes considerable area
and power overheads on the design.
III. REUSING VERIFICATION ASSERTIONS AS HT
DETECTOR
The foundation of this work originates from the utilization
of assertions as HT detectors, as discussed in [12]. A hardware
assertion is a statement or condition commonly specified in
HDLs that defines a certain expected behavior or property of
a digital circuit. This concept gains significance, particularly
when extensive time and effort are invested in the verification
of designs to ensure their integrity and the absence of bugs.
The generated verification assets (i.e., assertions), which are
often no longer utilized after the verification process, can
be repurposed for security applications, specifically for the
detection of HTs. The main challenge lies in the absence of
a technique to synthesize the assertions as checkers, as well
as a metric that identifies suitable assertions for use as HT
detectors. To address this gap, we introduced a novel metric
termed Security Coverage (SC) that evaluates the security
effectiveness of verification assertions [12].
A. Security Coverage
As the name indicates, SC focuses on assessing the security
qualifications of existing assertions. It is defined as the ratio
of nodes covered by the assertion to the total nodes within
the design. Each node (n) in the design is defined as either
covered (C) or vulnerable (V ), as indicated in Eq. 1.
Therefore, the SC of a design is calculated as follows:
SC(Des) =
|
Sk
i=1 Ci|
|
Sk
i=1 Ci| + |
Sk
i=1 Vi|
(2)
Where k denotes the total number of the assertions, and Ci
and Vi are the covered and vulnerable nodes, respectively.
An illustrative example representing a design with two
integrated assertions is presented in Fig. 3. To calculate the
SC for the entire design, Eq. 2 is applied. Furthermore, this
equation can be employed to determine the SC for each
individual assertion, enabling a comparative analysis of their
security properties. Considering the two assertions in this
scenario, the SC for each assertion is computed by finding the
number of covered nodes (C). Examining Fig. 3(b), nodes 1,
2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, and 16 (highlighted in green) have at
least one functional path1
to Assr 1. Similarly, the covered
elements for Assr 2 (highlighted in blue) encompass nodes 2,
3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, and 17, as depicted in Fig. 3(c). It is worth
1A functional path refers to a path within a circuit that can be traversed
using a combination of valid inputs. This contrasts with non-functional paths
that are unreachable with a given set of inputs.
1
3
2
7
10
13
9
8
6 12
5
4
15
18
16
14
11
17
D Q
QN
(a)
1
3
2
7
10
13
9
8
6 12
5
4
15
18
16
14
11
Assr_1
17
17
D Q
QN
(b)
1
3
2
7
10
13
9
8
6 12
5
4
15
18
16
14
11
Assr_2
17
17
D Q
QN
(c)
Fig. 3. An example of a) original design, b) nodes covered by bound assertion Assr 1, and c) nodes covered by bound assertion Assr 2
noting that certain nodes may appear in multiple subsets of
covered nodes for different assertions, exemplified by nodes
2, 3, and 7, while some other nodes may not be covered by
any assertions (nodes 11, 14, 15, and 18).
Nevertheless, several challenges restrict the calculation and
use of SC for assertions in a design:
1) Synthesis Limitations: The majority of verification as-
sertions are written to identify irregularities during sim-
ulation, and they cannot be synthesized. Consequently,
they cannot be bound to the design.
2) Functional Path Requirement: To consider a node
as covered, there must be a functional path between
the node and the output of the assertion. Hence, the
existence of a connection between the node and the
output of the assertion is not sufficient, and traditional
methods, such as extracting the input cone(s), cannot be
used.
3) Overheads: It is crucial to acknowledge that individual
assertions introduce specific overheads to the design.
It is also the case that combined assertions introduce
overheads that are not the sum of their individual over-
heads. In evaluating the effectiveness of each assertion,
it is necessary to consider these factors to allow for a
comprehensive evaluation of the trade-off space between
security and the associated design overheads.
The synthesis limitations problem is the main challenge
since it affects other problems. The most widely used lan-
guages for describing assertions are PSL and SystemVerilog,
but the use of standardized languages does not imply that they
are synthesizable – some assertions are clearly only meant for
simulation purposes and have to be filtered out. To address
this, we utilize the MBAC tool [43] to convert PSL and/or
SystemVerilog assertions into a synthesizable Verilog format.
Once the assertions are transformed into synthesizable code,
they are integrated with the main circuit for an assessment of
their effectiveness and the overhead they introduce. To address
the second challenge and obtain the SC for assertions, we
use the Cadence JasperGold Security Path Verification (SPV)
tool [44]. This tool allows us to perform a proof analysis for
verifying the existence of functional paths between desired
nodes in the design, also known as taint analysis. It should be
noted that JasperGold could have been replaced by any other
tool capable of doing taint analysis, academic or commercial.
In our scenario, the considered origin nodes are all nodes in
the design; the destination node is the assertion output. The
existence of a functional path between any node in the design
(origin) and the assertion output (destination) means that the
node is covered by the assertion (see Fig. 3).
In other words, if a covered node’s value is maliciously ma-
nipulated (e.g., due to an inserted HT activating its payload),
the assertion can detect it, functioning as an online monitor.
This concept shares similarities with verification schemes,
where assertions aim to identify irregularities in the design.
However, the key difference is that verification assertions are
only necessary until the logical synthesis step. Verification
engineers mainly seek to correct the potential mistakes made
by the design team, and they can achieve their objectives
through simulation, ensuring the functionality of the design.
Once they confirm that the design is bug-free, assertions
are no longer needed since the design’s functionality and
specification remain constant in subsequent chip design steps.
In contrast, security engineers must consider potential threats
during fabrication, and assertions that have transformed into
online monitors must remain with the design until the chip is
fabricated.
The third challenge involves quantifying the overheads
introduced by each assertion on the design. While simulation
offers insights into the circuit’s incorrect behavior and internal
values, it falls short in determining crucial performance char-
acteristics like power, timing, and area. To address this limita-
tion, the design undergoes multiple synthesis runs, and precise
performance reports are generated. Initially, the original circuit
is synthesized without the assertions, providing maximum
clock frequency, power, and area reports. Subsequently, the
circuit, now integrated with the bound assertions functioning
as embedded security checkers, undergoes synthesis again. The
evaluation is based on a comparative analysis of results from
the two synthesis processes, ensuring a comprehensive assess-
ment of assertion performance in terms of design overhead.
Once the SC and the overheads of each assertion are known,
we can decide if the assertion is worth to be kept or not. How-
ever, this cannot be performed manually since investigating
the trade-off between SC and overheads for each assertion is
a time-consuming task. Hence, an automation flow is needed
to select the assertions. The prerequisite of automation flow
is defining a strategy to only pick efficient assertions in terms
of security and overheads. This efficiency can be defined such
that the assertion has more security properties, imposes less
overheads on the design, or a balance between both.
Fig. 4 illustrates a proposed automated flow for the assertion
Start
Pick an assertion
from the candidate list
Calculate the SC
for the assertion
(JasperGold)
Change the assertion to
synthesizable format
(MBAC) Satisfied with
SC?
Bind the assertion
to the original circuit
Add the assertion
to the final list
Synthesize the design
and check the overheads
Candidate list
empty?
Overheads
acceptable?
The netlist is finalized for
use in the back-end step.
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Fig. 4. Optimization flow for selecting the assertions to be used as security
checkers
selection process. The initial step involves selecting an asser-
tion from the candidate list, which contains assertions with
synthesizable potential, excluding those with a simulation-
based nature that have already been filtered out. The chosen
assertion is then converted into synthesizable logic and inte-
grated into the design. This prepared design enables overhead
evaluation, where synthesis is performed with the assertion to
compare various metrics (e.g., power, performance, and area
(PPA)) against the values obtained from the original design.
After assessing the overheads and confirming their com-
patibility with user-defined requirements, the subsequent step
involves calculating the SC. This is achieved by employing
Eq. 2 and utilizing the JasperGold SPV tool. If the assertion
passes both the overhead evaluation and achieves the desired
SC, it is included in the final list of assertions. Otherwise (e.g.,
if the overheads are regarded as unacceptable or the SC falls
short of the user’s expectations), an alternative assertion from
the candidate list is considered (if any). It should be noted
that the decision in this step can be based on either the SC of
the assertion individually or the overall SC threshold, which
is specified by the user for the whole design. Once the flow
is completed, the generated netlist with the embedded asser-
tion(s) is considered finalized. This finalized netlist will be
used in the back-end stage for further security improvements
through the insertion of online monitors.
B. Evaluation of the Security Properties of Verification Asser-
tions
In a practical case study assessing the security properties
of verification assertions, we conducted an SC calculation for
predefined assertions in various IPs of the OpenTitan System
on Chip (SoC). Given that OpenTitan, an open-source silicon
root of trust project, is developed and maintained by a com-
munity of experienced engineers, it is recognized as a highly
reliable and suitable case study for evaluating the effectiveness
of our proposed framework. The initial experiment focused
on selecting four distinct assertions present in 35 different
Register Top modules of OpenTitan, resulting in a set of 140
assertions. This initial analysis indicates a selection based
on commonality across different IPs, disregarding specific
characteristics or overheads.
The SC of each assertion in different IPs are depicted in
Fig 5. As shown in this figure, the calculated SC percentages
for each assertion are less than 5%, which may raise concerns,
even when overlooking the associated overheads. However, it
is crucial to recognize that a lower SC does not necessarily
imply inadequate security properties, as some applications
prioritize safeguarding specific security-sensitive components
rather than the entire design.
The SC of an assertion is influenced by various factors,
with a crucial one being the nature of how the assertion
is formulated for verification. Specifically, if an assertion is
defined to concentrate only on local signals, such as checking
whether specific bits of a register are 0 or 1, it is generally
considered less impactful. On the contrary, assertions that are
not restricted to narrow scopes and instead describe high-level
behaviors are preferable. Consequently, for users prioritizing
a higher SC for the entire design over assertions safeguarding
specific design regions, the emphasis should be on selecting
assertions covering larger design parts. The initial experiment
did not prioritize assertions based on high-level descriptions
but focused on finding synthesizable assertions present in
multiple IPs. However, as depicted in Fig. 5, the SC results are
generally unremarkable. This underscores the need for further
analysis when choosing assertions, rather than blind selection.
In the subsequent experiment, we investigate the SC of
assertions uniquely generated for deployment in specific IPs,
causing them to be unsuitable for use in other IPs. This
experiment demands more effort, as synthesizable assertions
undergo a preliminary analysis before binding into the de-
sign. Consequently, not only unsynthesizable assertions are
excluded from consideration, but also assertions focused on
checking local signals are filtered out.
Figure 6 illustrates the calculated SC percentages for indi-
vidual assertions within three chosen IPs. As shown in this
figure, the SC for each assertion is notably higher compared
to the figures obtained from the initial experiment (Fig. 5).
The average SC stands at 85.83% for the selected assertions
in the ALERT HANDLER (Fig. 6(a)), 46.03% for the selected
assertions in the ALERT HANDLER ESC (Figure 6(b)), and
38.35% for the selected assertions in the FLASH PHY RD
module (Figure 6(c)).
C. Challenges
While achieving higher SC numbers for different assertions
(e.g., in the ALERT HANDLER ESC IP as shown in Fig. 6(a))
may suggest improved design security, it is crucial to acknowl-
edge that ensuring design security goes beyond relying solely
0
1
2
3
4
5
SC
(%)
ASR_1 ASR_2 ASR_3 ASR_4
Fig. 5. SC percentage for different IPs of OpenTitan
0
20
40
60
80
100
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
100
(b)
0
20
40
60
80
100
(c)
Fig. 6. Calculated SC percentage for the different assertions in selected IPs of OpenTitan: a) alert handler esc, b) alert handler, and c) flash phy rd
on SC metrics, even with high percentages (e.g., exceeding
80%). There are notable challenges associated with SC, and
some key ones include:
1) Ineffectiveness of verification assertions at runtime:
While functional assertions can cover various security
properties by ensuring the expected behavior of the
circuit, they may lack the precision to thoroughly cover
the negative or unexpected behavior of a circuit under
attack. Although the SPV tool is employed to calculate
taint propagation coverage, the effectiveness of detecting
HT behavior by the synthesized assertions at runtime is
not guaranteed.
2) Scalability concerns: The necessity to “bind the asser-
tion” and synthesize the entire design for characterizing
overheads may pose scalability challenges for larger de-
signs. The resource-intensive nature of this process could
limit its practicality for more extensive and complex
circuits.
3) Assertion availability: The methodology aims to reuse
existing assertions rather than generating new ones.
However, a potential challenge arises if no suitable
assertion with acceptable SC is found for a given design.
This situation is exemplified by the SC numbers obtained
for different assertions, as depicted in Fig. 5.
To overcome these challenges, an additional layer of se-
curity must be incorporated into the design to address the
limitations associated with reusing the verification assertions
as online monitors.
IV. ENHANCING THE SECURITY BY ADDING ONLINE
MONITORS DURING THE PHYSICAL SYNTHESIS
In this section, we introduce a novel methodology to in-
corporate online monitors into the layout during the physical
synthesis flow. While prior works have explored the idea of
integrating online monitors, most efforts have concentrated
on introducing these checkers during the front-end stage of
design. In our work, we take a different approach by directly
incorporating the checkers into the layout while considering
front-end inserted assertions.
Figure 7 provides a simplified view of the layout of a block
of an IC. The green polygons represent standard cells that are
later interconnected through various metal layers, establishing
the logical function of the design. Due to fabrication complex-
ities, particularly in modern process nodes, achieving 100%
density where the layout is entirely filled with standard cells,
is impractical. Thus, gaps are present in the layout, highlighted
in red in Fig. 7. These gaps can be later used by an adversary
for inserting his/her malicious logic (i.e., HTs) [29].
Despite these gaps being filled with filler cells before being
sent to fabrication, since these filler cells lack functionality
and are not connected to the original design, they can be easily
removed by the attacker inside the foundry. Our methodology
leverages these gaps and available resources to insert online
checkers into the design. By doing this, not only do we add
an extra security layer to the design, but also we limit the
adversary to put malicious logic by increasing the density and
congestion in the layout.
Although this methodology can also be used independently
with minor modifications in the flow, we use it as a com-
plementary methodology along with reusing the assertion for
Free Gaps
Standard Cells
VDD
VSS
Fig. 7. Illustrative example of a block layout within a chip
detecting HTs to cover its shortcomings. It should be noted
that we leverage the ECO features of the CAD tools for
inserting the online monitors into the layout2
. This use of ECO
minimizes alterations to the original layout with each added
online monitor, ensuring optimal overheads in comparison to
front-end approaches.
A. Online Monitors
As mentioned earlier, the online monitors act as an extra
protection layer for the nodes not covered by assertions.
To create this protection strategy, we use a Dual Modular
Redundancy (DMR) scheme, as shown in Fig. 8. The left
image (Fig. 8(a)) illustrates a subpart of a design represented in
Fig. 3, in which the covered nodes (10 and 17) are highlighted
in green, whereas the vulnerable/uncovered nodes (11, 14, and
18) are highlighted in red. To construct an online monitor for
this subset of the design, first, we duplicate the uncovered
gates with exactly the same equivalent gates from the library
(i.e., the same gate type, and same drive strength). Then, we
compare the output of the duplicated part with the output of
the original part by XORing these two signals, as depicted in
Fig. 8(b). Therefore, adding an online monitor for this part
adds seven new covered nodes (11, D11, 14, D14, 18, D18,
and V18) to the previously covered nodes (10 and 17).
It is important to highlight that an adversary may attempt to
substitute the online monitors by a HT. However, the online
monitors are always on and therefore contribute to the power
profile of the circuit. An HT, on the other hand, should have
a stealthy trigger, which is not compatible with an always-on
functionality. An HT that promotes a noticeable change in the
chip’s power profile is likely detectable.
A greater number of connected uncovered gates is desirable,
as all of these connected gates require only one XOR gate as a
voter. However, limitations inherent in the physical synthesis
flow may pose challenges to implementing DMR for all
uncovered gates, even if they form a cone, as illustrated in
Fig. 8. Further details on this aspect are elaborated in the
subsequent section.
2ECO features in CAD tools allow engineers to make last-minute mod-
ifications to the existing layout, such as adding or removing components,
changing connections, etc. These changes may be necessary due to factors
such as updated specifications, errors discovered in the initial design, or other
requirements that emerge during the design phase.
18
14
10 17
11
(a)
14
10
D11
D14
D18
V18
17
17
11
18
(b)
Fig. 8. An example of a) design before adding online monitors, and b) design
with the protection logic (D11, D14, and D18 as the duplicates and V18 as
the voter) to protect the uncovered gates (11, 14, and 18)
B. Embedding Online Monitors into the Layout
The comprehensive flow for integrating online monitors
during the physical synthesis flow is outlined in Fig. 9. It
involves four major steps that are detailed as follows:
Netlist
Uncovered
Nodes
Physical Synthesis 1
Layout
Density Analysis for the
Uncovered Nodes 2
Ranking the Candidates Based
on the Fanin Cone Size 3
Generating Layouts for
the ECO Round 4
Protected
Layouts
Fig. 9. An overall flow of integrating online monitors during the physical
synthesis
1) Physical Synthesis: The first step starts with turning
the netlist into a layout using a physical synthesis tool.
Here, the netlist includes the main design and all selected
assertions bound to it. This step involves several stages such as
placement, clock tree synthesis, and routing. Through physical
synthesis, vital information such as the precise placement
of standard cells, the physical distribution of the clock, and
the structure of interconnections in terms of wire length
or the utilization of each available metal layer is obtained.
Essentially, physical synthesis provides insight into the spatial
configuration of the design. It should be noted that this time-
consuming step is performed only once for each design.
2) Density Analysis for the Uncovered Nodes: The resulting
layout, along with the report of uncovered nodes from the SPV
tool, becomes the input to our developed analytical tool. The
objective here is to identify the uncovered nodes with available
gaps around them, suitable for housing the online checker
tasked with safeguarding the respective node. If there is no
space available around the uncovered node, the online checker
might be placed at a far distance from it, leading to higher
resource utilization and degradation of the PPA parameters of
the design. This is a crucial step in our flow to prevent this
from happening in order to minimize layout modifications. In
other words, the density analysis provides an adequate basis
for embedding the online monitors for future ECO rounds.
This makes the presented methodology different from front-
end protection schemes where the actual overheads are often
ignored. It should be noted that the scope of the searching
area around each node is adjustable and can be changed
according to the design size and density. A larger search
area increases the processing time because more potential
locations must be evaluated, and it can also lead to increased
use of routing resources, which can negatively impact the
overall performance of the design due to longer interconnect
delays and higher power consumption. Therefore, the balance
between the size of the search area and the associated overhead
must be carefully managed to optimize both the detection
capabilities and the design performance.
3) Ranking the Candidates Based on the Fanin Cone Size:
The generated candidates from the density analysis tool un-
dergo a ranking process. As emphasized earlier, our preference
is to place the online checker for a group of interconnected
uncovered nodes rather than individual gates. This choice of-
fers advantages in terms of area, power, and routing resources.
Therefore, our ranking system assigns higher priority to sub-
sets of candidate gates with larger input cones, optimizing the
overall efficiency of the protection scheme. It should be noted
that in our cone analysis, we only consider the candidates with
a cone size of 2 or greater to improve the efficiency of our
methodology.
4) Generating Layouts for the ECO Round: The final step
involves the generation of protected layouts. To facilitate this,
we developed a tool that takes the ranked list of candidates
(generated in the previous step) and integrates the online
checkers into the layout incrementally. More specifically, one
online monitor is added to the design at a time, and a
new layout containing the added monitor is generated. This
process is repeated from the top of the ranked list to the end.
Therefore, if there are n candidates (the nodes suitable to be
protected by online checkers) in the ranked list, we create n
different layout files in an iterative fashion. Each protected
layout file, such as Layout1, contains the online monitor
from Candidate1; Layout2 contains the online monitors for
Candidate1 and Candidate2, and so forth. It should be noted
that these protected layouts are generated to be used along
with the ECO flow, and the finalized layout, which includes
all potential online checkers and is intended for fabrication, is
derived after the conclusion of the ECO round.
Since the difference between each protected layout and its
predecessor is the addition of only one online monitor, the
user can decide whether to keep or discard the introduced
online monitor. This incremental approach ensures a controlled
integration of online monitors into the design while precisely
managing the resources utilized for adding each online mon-
itor. Moreover, it allows for a fine-grained assessment of the
impact on the PPA parameters of the design.
C. ECO Flow
As described, the insertion of online checkers and the
generation of protected layouts are efficiently conducted in
our methodology, prioritizing area and resource utilization. We
enhance this approach by introducing a timing-aware element
to the ECO flow. We introduce a metric called the Degrading
Factor (DF), set at 25% of the total positive slack of the
design before the addition of online checkers. This DF serves
as a deterministic parameter for deciding whether to keep or
discard protected layouts due to the impact on the timing.
For this purpose, different PPA numbers of the initial layout
are stored before incorporating online monitors. The ECO
flow starts by selecting the first protected layout, including
the highest-ranked online monitor from the cone analysis,
and calculates the PPA numbers for this modified layout.
Subsequently, the total slack number is compared with the
previous layout (the one excluding the newly added monitor).
If the slack number is negative or the difference between the
new slack and the previous one exceeds the DF, the ECO flow
discards the newly added layout since it degrades the timing
beyond user constraints and proceeds to the next one. This
process continues until all online monitors are integrated, or
there is no more slack available for the new logic. Additionally,
different checks are performed at each ECO round to ensure
compliance with various design rules and avoid issues arising
from the application of the new layout.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section presents the experimental results of
integrating online monitors for five different IPs of
OpenTitan. Two IPs were chosen for security reasons:
ALERT HANDLER ESC TIMER has the highest SC, and
KEYMGR REG TOP has the lowest SC. Other three IPs were
chosen based on their sizes: AST REG TOP is the largest
design, FLASH CTRL CORE REG TOP has an average size,
while the smallest one is NMI GEN REG TOP. It should be
noted that all these IPs are selected among the ones that
already have some assertions, to maintain the concept of
repurposing existing assertions. We do not introduce new
assertions or modify existing ones across different IPs. The
calculated SC for all these IPs is previously illustrated in Fig.
5 and Fig. 6.
We use the Cadence suite for all results herein reported:
logical synthesis is performed by Genus, while the physical
synthesis is performed by Innovus. The formal tool for per-
forming the taint analysis is JasperGold SPV, as mentioned
earlier. Our target technology node is a commercial 65nm
CMOS one.
A. Impact of Adding Online Monitors on SC
To assess the impact of integrating online monitors on the
security properties of each design, we employ the evaluation
TABLE I
THE IMPACT OF ADDING ONLINE MONITORS ON THE SECURITY OF SELECTED IPS
IP Name Instances
SC
Before
SC
Total
SC
Added
# Nodes Covered
by Monitors
# Applied
Monitors
# Ignored
Monitors
# Total
Monitors
Preventing
Factor
ALERT HANDLER ESC TIMER 1404 87.82% 88.25% 0.43% 6 1 0 1 Density
AST REG TOP 7048 2.49% 19.94% 17.45% 1382 183 7 190 Density
FLASH CTRL CORE REG TOP 7048 1.38% 17.98% 16.6% 954 105 264 369 Timing
KEYMGR REG TOP 4611 0.91% 10.89% 9.98% 490 55 86 141 Timing
NMI GEN REG TOP 214 3.53% 37.11% 33.58% 92 14 0 14 Density
scheme outlined in Eq. 2. The total covered nodes (C) in
the numerator of Eq. 2 now encompass both the nodes
previously covered by the assertion and the newly covered
nodes introduced by the online monitor. It should be noted
that since the output of the assertion or the voter of the
online monitors can only be changed by an abnormality in
the circuit’s expected behavior, the chance of a false positive
is eliminated. Consequently, the results obtained from the
embedded checkers and assertions are always considered as
true positive.
Table I presents the results concerning the impact of added
online monitors on the security of the considered designs.
In this table, the first column denotes the IP name, while
the second column enumerates the instances in each IP.
The third column indicates the SC before the integration of
online monitors. These values are obtained by binding all
available assertions to each IP and analyzing the coverage
using the SPV tool. The fourth and fifth columns represent
the SC after adding the online monitors and the increase
in SC specifically due to the online monitors, respectively.
As indicated, the lowest increase in SC is 0.43% for the
ALERT HANDLER ESC TIMER IP. This is mainly because
this IP already has a high number of covered nodes, and
finding suitable candidates that pass all steps of the online
monitor insertion flow (as shown in Fig. 9) is challenging. In
other words, finding a set of uncovered connected nodes with
sufficient space around them is more difficult since the total
number of uncovered nodes is limited. However, the increased
SC is not the only benefit we achieve. The introduced logic for
inserting online monitors also fills the gaps in the layout and
utilizes routing resources, which positively impacts security
by reducing potential exploitation opportunities for attackers.
In column 6, the number of total covered nodes is presented
after the addition of online monitors. These covered nodes
include the nodes not covered by the assertions and the new
redundant logic added to form the online checker. Columns
7 and 8 represent the number of applied online monitors in
the IP and the number of ignored ones. Column 9 represents
the number of online monitors that can be generated for each
design after performing density and cone analysis (Fig. 9).
The total number of online monitors is equal to the number
of individual protected layouts generated for the ECO flow. It
should be noted that not all generated online monitors can be
integrated into the design due to timing restrictions.
The final column indicates the factor preventing the addition
of more online monitors. If all available online monitors can
be successfully integrated into the design, it means that there
are no more online monitors that could be generated, mainly
because of the high density around the uncovered nodes. In
contrast, if some online monitors are left unembedded in the
design (excluding those that exceed the DF), it is mainly
because the timing resources of the design are exhausted,
and they have to be ignored. More details about the PPA
restrictions are discussed in the next part.
B. Impact of Adding Online Monitors on PPA
The initial layout (baseline) for each IP is configured such
that each design has a density ranging between 60% to 65%.
By doing this, we can preserve a positive setup slack of
approximately 10% of the clock period for each design. Given
that the online monitors introduce new logic to the design,
influencing its timing, this 10% margin allows the utilization
of positive slack for integrating online monitors.
Table II presents various PPA metrics before and after
adding the online monitors to the selected IPs. The first column
denotes the IP names. The next two columns illustrate the area
and placement characteristics of the layouts, where the second
column represents the total area for each design, and the third
column represents the placement density. It should be noted
that the total area reported in this table refers to the total
cell area, and not the overall physical area of the block/chip.
Among all designs, NMI GEN REG TOP experienced the most
significant increase in area parameters, as it is the smallest
design, and even a few online monitors make the size of the
added logic comparable to the overall design size.
The fourth column represents the total power consumed by
each IP, with NMI GEN REG TOP again showing the largest
increase among the IPs due to its small size. The fifth and sixth
columns present the timing characteristics of the design. While
the hold slack remains relatively constant for all designs, the
setup slack undergoes considerable changes for most of the
designs, as the redundant logic might impact the timing of
the design based on its location in different timing paths of
the design. Consistent with Table I, the two designs with the
preventing factor of timing (FLASH CTRL CORE REG TOP
and KEYMGR REG TOP) exhibit the highest decrease in setup
slack.
The last column represents the total metal wire length
for each design. These metal wires are utilized to connect
different parts of the design (signal routing), distribute power,
or propagate the clock. As previously mentioned, the adversary
not only needs gaps to place malicious logic but also requires
available routing resources to connect the malicious logic
to other parts of the design. The increase in the total wire
length of the design suggests that the design has become more
TABLE II
THE IMPACT OF ADDING ONLINE MONITORS ON THE PPA METRICS OF SELECTED IPS
IP Name
Total Area
(µm2)
Placement
Density
Total Power
(mW)
Setup Slack
(ns)
Hold Slack
(ns)
Total Wire
Length (µm)
ALERT HANDLER ESC TIMER (before) 3692.88 63.94% 1.46 0.328 0.133 22305.40
ALERT HANDLER ESC TIMER (after) 3700.80 64.07% 1.47 0.328 0.133 22351.75
Difference +0.21% +0.20% +0.68% 0.00% 0.00% +0.21%
AST REG TOP (before) 28644.48 61.46% 9.93 0.287 0.084 353799.80
AST REG TOP (after) 30848.76 66.18% 10.26 0.091 0.07 397612.20
Difference +7.69% +7.68% +3.32% -68.29% -16.67% +12.38%
FLASH CTRL CORE REG TOP (before) 14243.40 64.25% 4.94 0.210 0.181 148407.90
FLASH CTRL CORE REG TOP (after) 15542.28 70.11% 5.13 0.007 0.186 170461.90
Difference +9.12% +9.12% +3.85% -96.67% +2.76% +14.86%
KEYMGR REG TOP (before) 18325.80 62.68% 8.11 0.278 0.152 186978.10
KEYMGR REG TOP (after) 19062.72 65.20% 8.29 0.000 0.151 199832.90
Difference +4.02% +4.02% +2.22% -100% -0.66% +6.87%
NMI GEN REG TOP (before) 769.68 61.16% 0.23 0.118 0.178 4841.51
NMI GEN REG TOP (after) 918.00 72.94% 0.27 0.043 0.179 6077.74
Difference +19.27% +19.26% +17.39% -63.56% +0.56% +25.53%
Baseline 1
0.33
ALERT HANDLER ESC TIMER
(a)
Baseline 90 183
0.07
0.17
0.29
AST REG TOP
(b)
Baseline 50 105
0
0.10
0.21
FLASH CTRL CORE REG TOP
(c)
Baseline 27 55
0
0.14
0.28
KEYMGR REG TOP
(d)
Baseline 7 14
0.04
0.08
0.12
NMI REG TOP
(e)
Fig. 10. Changes in setup slack after each round of adding the online monitors for different IPs
congested, and the free routing resources are now more limited
for use by the adversary.
To provide a more detailed insight into the impact of adding
each online monitor to the design characteristics, we have
extracted various PPA results at the end of each ECO round,
where the new online monitor is successfully integrated into
the design. This detailed breakdown allows us to observe
individual impacts on different characteristics throughout the
iterative ECO process. Fig. 10 illustrates the degradation in the
setup slack after each successful ECO round. The vertical axis
represents the total setup slack time in nanoseconds, ranging
from the worst to the best slack time, while the horizontal axis
depicts the progression of ECO rounds.
As previously mentioned, the ECO flow initiates with the
layout containing the assertions, referred to as the “Baseline”
in Fig. 10. As depicted in this figure, some rounds have a
negligible impact on the timing, while others considerably
degrade the total setup slack. There are also cases in which the
slack is improved, attributed to the heuristics of the physical
synthesis tool. However, this degradation does not exceed
the DF, which is set at 25% of the total setup slack. It is
worth noting that this parameter can be adjusted based on the
user’s preferences. For instance, if set to lower values, online
monitors causing a sudden decrease in the total setup slack
(e.g., the online monitor added in round 81 in Fig. 10(b)) will
be discarded, resulting in a smoother overall trend for setup
slack decrease.
Fig. 11 illustrates the progressive increase in wire length
for each metal layer in the protected layouts. The vertical
axis represents the wire length in µm, while the horizontal
axis denotes the protected layout in each round. Similar to
Fig. 10, the “Baseline” term refers to the layout containing
assertions without online monitors. Although the number of
available metal stacks varies in different target technologies,
with new technologies typically offering ten or more metal
layers, higher consumption of upper metal layers indicates
increased congestion in the design. As a defender, our focus
is on higher consumption of upper metal layers, reflecting
the overall increase in congestion in the protected layouts.
Excluding ALERT HANDLER ESC TIMER, where only one
online checker was available to be added, we observe a
consistent trend of increased wire length in metal layers M3-
M6 for all designs in Fig. 11, thereby reducing the available
free routing resources for potential adversaries.
The visual representations of the layout, including place-
ment configuration and the routed view of designs before
and after the integration of online monitors, are illustrated
in Fig. 12. In each row, the left image pair showcases the
cell placement, while the right one displays the routed view.
Specifically, the left image in each pair represents the layout
before the addition of online monitors, while the right image
corresponds to the final protected layout after the successful
completion of all ECO rounds. Upon comparing the images
on the right with those on the left, it is evident that the overall
Baseline 1
0
10k
ALERT HANDLER ESC TIMER
(a)
Baseline 90 183
0
104k
AST REG TOP
(b)
Baseline 50 105
0
50k
FLASH CTRL CORE REG TOP
(c)
Baseline 27 55
0
62k
KEYMGR REG TOP
(d)
Baseline 14
0
2.8k
NMI REG TOP
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M7
(e)
Fig. 11. The impact of adding online monitors on the length of different metal layers in the protected layouts for different IPs
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT DETECTION AND DFHT TECHNIQUES
Technique Refs
Detection
or DfHT
Design
Stage
Attacker
Location
Prevents
HT?
Pros. Cons.
IC Fingerprinting,
Delay Meas.
[16]–[19] Detection Test
Des. house,
Foundry
No
Nearly zero overheads,
Non-destructive method
Needs reverse engineering for
attributes of the Golden chip,
Confusion with environmental
and process variation effects
Logic Testing [21] [22] Detection Test
Des. house,
Foundry
No
Very fast technique,
Can be fully automatic
All input combinations are
not covered to activate HTs,
Ineffective when dealing with
HTs with sequential triggers
BISA,
Layout Filling
[29]–[31] DfHT Back-end Foundry Yes
Replacement of filler cells
with the functional ones,
Independent testing circuit
from the original one
Design becomes unroutable
in high occupation ratios,
Favors layouts with
large continuous gaps
Selective
Placement
[39]–[41] DfHT Back-end Foundry Yes
Lowest overheads among
HT prevention techniques
Risk of violating the critical
paths in the routing stage,
Timing degradation
TPAD [36] Both
Front-end,
Back-end*
Des. house,
Foundry
Yes Zero false positives,
Applicable to FPGA
Considerable overheads,
Risk of degradation
SCARF This work Both
Front-end,
Back-end
Foundry Yes Reusing verification assets,
Low PPA overheads
Achieving high density for
some designs is challenging
* This technique is mainly applied in the front-end stage. To prevent CAD tool attacks, the design is split into two parts, each processed by different
CAD tools independently. The final layouts from these tools are later merged in the back-end stage for being set to the foundry for fabrication.
placement and routing configuration of the layouts remained
unchanged, even for larger designs. This highlights the more
efficient utilization of resources, which is a key advantage of
our methodology in adding online monitors during the physical
synthesis compared to similar works performed in the front-
end step of chip design.
C. SCARF Versus Other Techniques
Table III provides a comparative analysis of our framework
with other detection and DfHT approaches. The first column
indicates the specific technique or category, while the second
column references works in that category. The third column
categorizes the technique into detection or DfHT (or both).
The subsequent column details the chip design stage where
the method is applied for protection. Column 5 specifies the
location of the potential attacker, and column 6 indicates if
the technique can also be employed to prevent HTs. The last
two columns briefly outline the advantages and disadvantages
of the techniques, respectively.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a defensive framework aimed
at enhancing the security of chips against fabrication-time
attacks. The first part of the presented framework focused
on the front-end stage, where we demonstrated the reuse
of verification assertions by transforming them into secu-
rity checkers. However, some security checkers may not be
optimally effective, particularly those designed primarily for
debugging purposes. To address this limitation, we proposed a
novel methodology involving the insertion of online checkers
during the back-end stage of the physical synthesis.
Although we designed the back-end methodology as a
complementary approach to the front-end one, both techniques
can be used independently based on user preferences and re-
quirements. Our experimental results demonstrate that adding
online monitors results in a modest increase of less than
20% in area, power, and placement density in the worst case.
Simultaneously, it enhances the SC by 33.58% in the best
case. Notably, our methodology utilizes only positive slack
time during the ECO flow for adding online monitors, ensuring
that it does not degrade the overall timing of the design.
While our framework has demonstrated promising results,
there is still room for improvement. Future work could focus
on embedding various optimizations to reduce the imposed
area and power, as well as incorporating path awareness into
the flow to make better use of positive slack time.
95.6 µm
(a) (b)
234.2 µm
(c) (d)
167.6 µm
(e) (f)
189.2 µm
(g) (h)
46.2 µm
(i) (j)
Fig. 12. The layout view of the IPs before and after adding online monitors, whereas the left pair of images in each row represents the placement configuration,
while the right one represents the routed view of each design: a, b) ALERT HANDLER ESC TIMER, c, d) AST REG TOP, e, f) FLASH CTRL CORE REG TOP, g, h)
KEYMGR REG TOP, and i, j) NMI REG TOP
REFERENCES
[1] C. Ting-Fang, “Tsmc to triple u.s. chip invest-
ment to $40bn to serve apple, others,” 2022. [On-
line]. Available: https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Tech/Semiconductors/
TSMC-to-triple-U.S.-chip-investment-to-40bn-to-serve-Apple-others
[2] S. Bhunia et al., “Hardware trojan attacks: Threat analysis and counter-
measures,” Proc. IEEE, pp. 1229–1247, 2014.
[3] M. Tehranipoor et al., “A survey of hardware trojan taxonomy and
detection,” Des. Test, p. 10–25, 2010.
[4] C. Helfmeier et al., “Breaking and entering through the silicon,” in Proc.
Comp. Comm. Sec., 2013, p. 733–744.
[5] S. E. Quadir et al., “A survey on chip to system reverse engineering,”
J. Emerg. Technol. Comput. Syst., pp. 1–34, 2016.
[6] R. Karri et al., “Trustworthy hardware: Identifying and classifying
hardware trojans,” Computer, pp. 39–46, 2010.
[7] W. Hu et al., “An overview of hardware security and trust: Threats,
countermeasures, and design tools,” Trans. Comp.-Aided Des. Integ.
Circ. Sys., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1010–1038, 2021.
[8] M. Rostami et al., “A primer on hardware security: Models, methods,
and metrics,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 102, no. 8, pp. 1283–1295, 2014.
[9] S. Bhunia et al., “Protection against hardware trojan attacks: Towards a
comprehensive solution,” Des. Test, pp. 6–17, 2013.
[10] V. Gohil et al., “Deterrent: Detecting trojans using reinforcement learn-
ing,” in Proc. Des. Autom. Conf., 2022, pp. 697–702.
[11] “Enisa threat landscape 2023.” [Online]. Available: https://www.enisa.
europa.eu/publications/enisa-threat-landscape-2023
[12] M. Eslami et al., “Reusing verification assertions as security checkers
for hardware trojan detection,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Qual. Elec. Des.,
2022, pp. 1–6.
[13] Y. Jin et al., Design for Hardware Trust. New York, NY: Springer New
York, 2012, pp. 365–384.
[14] K. Xiao et al., “Hardware trojans: Lessons learned after one decade of
research,” Trans. Des. Autom. Elec. Sys., pp. 1–23, 2016.
[15] C. Bao et al., “On reverse engineering-based hardware trojan detection,”
Trans. Comp.-Aided Des. Integ. Circ. Sys., pp. 49–57, 2016.
[16] D. Agrawal et al., “Trojan detection using ic fingerprinting,” in Proc.
Symp. Sec. Priv., 2007, pp. 296–310.
[17] Y. Jin et al., “Hardware trojan detection using path delay fingerprint,”
in Proc. Int. Symp. Hardw.-Orient. Sec. Trust, 2008, pp. 51–57.
[18] I. Exurville et al., “Resilient hardware trojans detection based on path
delay measurements,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Hardw.-Orient. Sec. Trust,
2015, pp. 151–156.
[19] X.-T. Ngo et al., “Hardware trojan detection by delay and electromag-
netic measurements,” in Proc. Des. Autom. Test Europe, 2015, pp. 782–
787.
[20] F. Wolff et al., “Towards trojan-free trusted ics: Problem analysis and
detection scheme,” in Proc. Des. Autom. Test Europe, 2008, pp. 1362–
1365.
[21] S. Dupuis et al., “New testing procedure for finding insertion sites of
stealthy hardware trojans,” in Proc. Des. Autom. Test Europe, 2015, pp.
776–781.
[22] N. Lesperance et al., “Hardware trojan detection using exhaustive testing
of k-bit subspaces,” in Proc. Asia South Pac. Des. Autom. Conf., 2015,
pp. 755–760.
[23] H. Salmani et al., “A novel technique for improving hardware trojan
detection and reducing trojan activation time,” Trans. VLSI Syst., pp.
112–125, 2012.
[24] B. Zhou et al., “Cost-efficient acceleration of hardware trojan detection
through fan-out cone analysis and weighted random pattern technique,”
Trans. Comp.-Aided Des. Integ. Circ. Sys., pp. 792–805, 2016.
[25] R. S. Chakraborty et al., “On-demand transparency for improving
hardware trojan detectability,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Hardw.-Orient. Sec.
Trust, 2008, pp. 48–50.
[26] J. Rajendran et al., “Security analysis of logic obfuscation,” in Proc.
Des. Autom. Conf., 2012, pp. 83–89.
[27] R. S. Chakraborty et al., “Harpoon: An obfuscation-based soc design
methodology for hardware protection,” Trans. Comp.-Aided Des. Integ.
Circ. Sys., vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 1493–1502, 2009.
[28] J. Rajendran et al., “Security analysis of integrated circuit camouflaging,”
in Proc. Comp. Comm. Sec., 2013, p. 709–720.
[29] K. Xiao et al., “Bisa: Built-in self-authentication for preventing hardware
trojan insertion,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Hardw.-Orient. Sec. Trust, 2013,
pp. 45–50.
[30] ——, “A novel built-in self-authentication technique to prevent inserting
hardware trojans,” Trans. Comp.-Aided Des. Integ. Circ. Sys., pp. 1778–
1791, 2014.
[31] P.-S. Ba et al., “Hardware trust through layout filling: A hardware trojan
prevention technique,” in Proc. Comp. Soc. Symp. VLSI, 2016, pp. 254–
259.
[32] K. Xiao et al., “Efficient and secure split manufacturing via obfuscated
built-in self-authentication,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Hardw.-Orient. Sec.
Trust, 2015, pp. 14–19.
[33] M. Rostami et al., “Hardware security: Threat models and metrics,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Comp.-Aided Des., 2013, pp. 819–823.
[34] T. D. Perez et al., “A survey on split manufacturing: Attacks, defenses,
and challenges,” IEEE Access, pp. 184 013–184 035, 2020.
[35] C. Bao et al., “Temperature tracking: Toward robust run-time detection
of hardware trojans,” Trans. Comp.-Aided Des. Integ. Circ. Sys., pp.
1577–1585, 2015.
[36] T. F. Wu et al., “Tpad: Hardware trojan prevention and detection for
trusted integrated circuits,” Trans. Comp.-Aided Des. Integ. Circ. Sys.,
pp. 521–534, 2016.
[37] T. Trippel et al., “Icas: an extensible framework for estimating the
susceptibility of ic layouts to additive trojans,” in Proc. Symp. Sec. Priv.,
2020, pp. 1742–1759.
[38] H. M. Kamali et al., “Advances in logic locking: Past, present, and
prospects,” Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2022/260, 2022.
[39] G. Guo et al., “Assurer: A ppa-friendly security closure framework for
physical design,” in Proc. Asia South Pac. Des. Autom. Conf., 2023, p.
504–509.
[40] J. Knechtel et al., “Security closure of physical layouts iccad special
session paper,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comp.-Aided Des., 2021, pp. 1–9.
[41] X. Wei et al., “Gdsii-guard: Eco anti-trojan optimization with ex-
ploratory timing-security trade-offs,” in Proc. Des. Autom. Conf., 2023,
pp. 1–6.
[42] S. Mitra et al., “Which concurrent error detection scheme to choose ?”
in Proc. Int. Test Conf., 2000, pp. 985–994.
[43] M. Boulé et al., “Automata-based assertion-checker synthesis of psl
properties,” ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst., 2008.
[44] Cadence Design Systems, Inc., “Jasper spv app,”
2024. [Online]. Available: https://cadence.com/en US/home/
tools/system-design-and-verification/formal-and-static-verification/
jasper-gold-verification-platform/security-path-verification-app.html
Mohammad Eslami received his M.S. degree in
computer engineering from the Shahid Bahonar Uni-
versity of Kerman, Kerman, Iran, in 2018. Currently,
he is pursuing his doctoral studies at the Centre for
Hardware Security, Tallinn University of Technology
(TalTech), Tallinn, Estonia.
His research interests primarily revolve around
hardware security, with a particular focus on physi-
cal design automation and secure ASIC design.
Tara Ghasempouri received the PhD degree from
University of Verona, Italy in 2016. Currently, she
is a Senior Researcher at Tallinn University of
Technology (TalTech) in Tallinn, Estonia. Her fields
of interest are Hardware verification and Hardware
security. At the moment, she leads projects con-
cerned with security of digital system as well as
self-driving vehicle. She started collaboration with
Taltech by receiving Mobilitas+ postdoctoral grant.
She had research visitor position at the University of
Delft, The Netherlands and TU Munich, Germany.
Samuel Pagliarini (M’14) received the PhD degree
from Telecom ParisTech, Paris, France, in 2013.
He has held research positions with the University
of Bristol, Bristol, UK, and with Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. From 2019 to 2023,
he led the Centre for Hardware Security at Tallinn
University of Technology in Tallinn, Estonia. He is
currently a professor at Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
