04 June 2026
Alma Mater Studiorum Università di Bologna
Archivio istituzionale della ricerca
Perotti, M., Cavalcante, M., Andri, R., Cavigelli, L., Benini, L. (2024). Ara2: Exploring Single- and Multi-Core
Vector Processing With an Efficient RVV 1.0 Compliant Open-Source Processor. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
COMPUTERS, 73(7), 1822-1836 [10.1109/TC.2024.3388896].
Published Version:
Ara2: Exploring Single- and Multi-Core Vector Processing With an Efficient RVV 1.0 Compliant Open-Source
Processor
Published:
DOI: http://doi.org/10.1109/TC.2024.3388896
Terms of use:
(Article begins on next page)
Some rights reserved. The terms and conditions for the reuse of this version of the manuscript are
specified in the publishing policy. For all terms of use and more information see the publisher's website.
Availability:
This version is available at: https://hdl.handle.net/11585/1004690 since: 2025-02-11
This is the final peer-reviewed author’s accepted manuscript (postprint) of the following publication:
This item was downloaded from IRIS Università di Bologna (https://cris.unibo.it/).
When citing, please refer to the published version.
1
Ara2: Exploring Single- and Multi-Core Vector
Processing with an Efficient RVV 1.0 Compliant
Open-Source Processor
Matteo Perotti, Student Member, IEEE, Matheus Cavalcante, Student Member, IEEE,
Renzo Andri, Member, IEEE, Lukas Cavigelli, Member, IEEE, and Luca Benini, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Vector processing is highly effective in boosting processor performance and efficiency for data-parallel workloads. In this
paper, we present Ara2, the first fully open-source vector processor to support the RISC-V V 1.0 frozen ISA. We evaluate Ara2’s
performance on a diverse set of data-parallel kernels for various problem sizes and vector-unit configurations, achieving an average
functional-unit utilization of 95% on the most computationally intensive kernels. We pinpoint performance boosters and bottlenecks,
including the scalar core, memories, and vector architecture, providing insights into the main vector architecture’s performance drivers.
Leveraging the openness of the design, we implement Ara2 in a 22nm technology, characterize its PPA metrics on various configurations
(2-16 lanes), and analyze its microarchitecture and implementation bottlenecks. Ara2 achieves a state-of-the-art energy efficiency of 37.8
DP-GFLOPS/W (0.8V) and 1.35GHz of clock frequency (critical path: ∼40 FO4 gates). Finally, we explore the performance and
energy-efficiency trade-offs of multi-core vector processors: we find that multiple vector cores help overcome the scalar core issue-rate
bound that limits short-vector performance. For example, a cluster of eight 2-lane Ara2 (16 FPUs) achieves more than 3x better
performance than a 16-lane single-core Ara2 (16 FPUs) when executing a 32x32x32 matrix multiplication, with 1.5x improved energy
efficiency.
Index Terms—RISC-V, Vector, ISA, RVV, Processor, Efficiency, Multi-Core.
✦
1 INTRODUCTION
IN 1976, the Cray-1 supercomputer [1] achieved the world’s
top performance of 250 MFLOPS by exploiting Data Level
Parallelism (DLP) through a vector Instruction Set Archi-
tecture (ISA). Almost half a century later, in 2020, another
vector architecture took the highest spot in the TOP500 list
by scoring around 537 PFLOPS of peak performance: the
Fugaku supercomputer, based on Fujitsu’s A64FX processor
and Arm’s Scalable Vector Extension (SVE).
Despite an increase in raw computer performance by nine
orders of magnitude, today’s computing systems struggle to
meet the performance requirements of ubiquitous Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) workloads. The
amount of data to process grows faster than the technology-
driven processing-speed gain [2], and the power required to
sustain the ever-increasing performance needs is the main
limiting factor from the cloud (operating cost, cooling) to
the edge (battery lifetime, weight). It comes as no surprise
• Matteo Perotti is with the Integrated Systems Laboratory (IIS), ETH
Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland. E-mail: mperotti@iis.ee.ethz.ch
• Matheus Cavalcante is with the Electrical Engineering Department,
Stanford University, California 94305, USA. E-mail: mcv@stanford.edu
• Renzo Andri and Lukas Cavigelli are with the Huawei Zurich Research
Center. E-mail: {renzo.andri, lukas.cavigelli}@huawei.com
• Luca Benini is with the Integrated Systems Laboratory (IIS), ETH Zurich,
Switzerland, and also with the Department of Electrical, Electronic and
Information Engineering (DEI), University of Bologna, 40126 Bologna,
Italy. E-mail: lbenini@iis.ee.ethz.ch.
© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE
must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes,
creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
DOI: 10.1109/TC.2024.3388896
that the quest for energy efficiency is crucial for today’s
computing systems [3] across all performance profiles, from
supercomputers (Green500 ranking) to ultra-low power AI
processors (MLPerf Tiny).
While the Cray-1 vector processor was conceived for
pure performance in the heydays of Emitter-Coupled Logic
(ECL) bipolar transistor technology, the recent feat of Fugaku
proves that vector ISAs are well-positioned to answer the
conflicting needs of rapidly increasing computational de-
mands under a tightly-constrained power budget. First, they
effectively address the Von Neumann Bottleneck (VNB) by
reducing the number of instructions fetched from memory
through the execution of the same instruction on multiple
elements, in the so-called single instruction, multiple data
(SIMD) execution model. Furthermore, vector processors
leverage a Vector Register File (VRF) to enhance data reuse
in computationally intensive applications while remaining
vector-length agnostic, as the vector length can be pro-
grammed at runtime.
After the release of Arm’s SVE and SVE2 vector ISAs,
RISC-V also developed its RISC-V “V” (RVV) vector ex-
tension, getting much interest due to its openness and
extensibility. RVV has reached frozen state with its 1.0 release
in 2021 after six years of design and standardization ef-
forts. Companies and academia developed numerous vector
designs supporting various pre-release versions of RVV
and targeting different application domains such as High-
Performance Computing (HPC) [4], [5], [6], Deep Neural
Networks (DNN) [7], AI/Augmented Reality (AR) [8], real-
time applications [9], and Internet-of-Things (IoT) endpoints
[10]. These designs are characterized by their heterogeneity
2
in terms of deployed system architectures: [4], [5], [9], [11]
are single-core systems, while [8], [10], [12], [13] are multi-
core or multi-core-ready. Among them, [4], [9], [12] work
with a relatively simple in-order core, while [5], [8], [10], [11],
[13], [14] deploy more aggressive superscalar or out-of-order
scalar pipelines.
These designs show a wide spectrum of vector architec-
tures, but there is a fundamental lack of detailed architectural
performance studies on the effects that the design parameters
of a vector processor (VRF organization and size, number of
processing elements (PEs), target application vector length)
and system configurations (scalar core, scalar caches, single-
or multi-core configuration) have on the system’s perfor-
mance and energy efficiency. As already noticed in [4], the
scalar core can highly limit the system’s performance when
processing short vectors. Moreover, despite the efforts to
propose standard RVV benchmarks to ease architectural
development and comparison [15], the aforementioned
publications provide performance data only for, in the best
case, a small set of kernels.
In the constellation of RISC-V-based Vector processor
architectures, Ara [4] was among the earliest ones. Its internal
number of Floating Point Units (FPUs) could be scaled from
2 to 16, and the design, implemented in a 22nm technology,
reached 1 GHz in typical conditions in all the configurations,
with a leading State-of-the-Art (SoA) of 41 DP-GFLOPS/W
energy efficiency at its peak and 97% of FPUs peak utilization.
The architecture, though, was compliant with only a limited
set of RVV 0.5, the very first and preliminary version of RVV,
missing key instructions like vector reductions, ubiquitous in
the ML domain. The ISA architectural specifications and the
software ecosystem deeply changed with the RVV updates,
and RVV 0.5-compliant designs are now obsolete.
In this paper, we extend our previous work [16] by
presenting a thorough analysis of an RVV 1.0 vector pro-
cessor’s performance behavior over a wide range of kernels
from different domains. We analyze its performance and
scalability in a modern 22-nm technology, exploring the per-
formance/power trade-off of multi-core vector architectures.
We implemented support for all the RVV 1.0 instructions not
supported in [16], and we describe the micro-architectural
optimizations that allow the architecture to scale up. To our
knowledge, Ara2 is the first open-source vector processor
to support the specification RISC-V V 1.0. We analyze
the frozen RVV specification and its major effects on the
microarchitecture of a vector processor, highlighting the
novelties/changes and the issues that arise from them.
Furthermore, Ara2 aims to close the gap between the
various RVV architectures proposed throughout the years
and the lack of thorough performance/efficiency analyses for
microarchitecture and implementation. The key contributions
of this work are:
• The Ara2 microarchitecture and design1
, with support
for the RISC-V “V” 1.0 ISA. We analyze the changes
from the previous preliminary RVV specifications and
discuss their impact on the system microarchitecture.
To the best of our knowledge, Ara2 is the first open-
source processor to support RVV 1.0.
1. https://github.com/pulp-platform/ara
• An in-depth analysis of performance depending on
the application vector length on benchmark kernels
from different application domains (Linear algebra,
Digital Signal Processing (DSP), ML). Furthermore,
we analyze the effect that the scalar processor and its
memory system have on performance.
• An implementation of the Ara2 system in a 22nm
Fully Depleted - Silicon on Insulator (FD-SOI) technol-
ogy and its Power, Performance, Area (PPA) metric
analysis from 2 to 16 lanes, with insights into the
impact that microarchitectural optimizations of the
most critical all-to-all unit (Slide Unit (SLDU)) have
on the scalability of the vector architecture.
• A performance/efficiency trade-off study on different
hardware configurations, varying the number of
vector cores and lanes per vector core on different
problem sizes. We demonstrate how a multi-core
vector architecture can mitigate the performance
impact of the scalar core’s issue-rate limitation and
identify the most efficient architecture for specific
application vector lengths.
The paper is structured as follows: Sections 1 and 2
present an introduction and a background to contextualize
the overall work. In Section 3, we present the updated archi-
tecture, while in Section 4, we describe our experiment setup
and the benchmark kernels used for our evaluations. Then,
we present performance analysis, physical implementation
results, and a performance/efficiency trade-off study on
single- and multi-core architectures in Sections 5, 6, and
7, respectively. Finally, we provide a comparison with the
state-of-the-art in Section 8.
2 RELATED WORK AND BACKGROUND
A vector processor is characterized by its internal VRF,
composed of a fixed number of registers whose size is
upper-bounded by the ISA (usually with a very loose upper
bound). Arm SVE and RVV feature 32 vector registers, each
of which with a size from 128 to 2048 (SVE) or 64k (RVV)
bits. The VRF can be conceptualized as L0 storage, meant to
buffer data elements re-used multiple times close to the PEs
(with PE, we identify FPUs, Multipliers, Arithmetic-Logic
Units (ALUs), etc.). As noticed in [17], vector processors
are memory-latency tolerant, especially when working on
longer vectors. Moreover, the vector architecture amortizes
the instructions’ fetch, decode, and issue cost by executing
it on as many elements as they fit in a vector register.
Table 1 summarizes recently published RVV designs and
compares them with Ara2. One key implementation chal-
lenge tied to the ratified RVV 1.0 ISA is matching a scalable
lane-based architecture with the VRF byte layout, mixed-
width operations, and the VRF writing policy. As detailed in
[16], Ara2 assigns consecutive elements to consecutive lanes
to ease mixed-width operations. This byte layout exposes the
following challenges:
Source Registers Every time a source register is read
with an Element Width EWnew
vs different than its previously
encoded EWold
vs , the hardware has to reshuffle its bytes across
the lanes to reinterpret its content according to EWnew
vs . To do
so, the hardware injects a reshuffle micro-operation before
3
TABLE 1: Overview of RISC-V Vector Processors.
Core Name RVV Target XLEN float VLEN Split VRF Open-
version (bit) supp. (bit) (lanes) Source
This work 1.0 ASIC 64 ✓ 1024a
✓ ✓
[14] SiFive P870 1.0 ASIC 64 ✓ 128 ? ✗
[8] SiFive X280 1.0 ASIC 64 ✓ 512 ? ✗
[13] SiFive P270 1.0rc ASIC 64 ✓ 256 ? ✗
[11] Andes NX27V 1.0 ASIC 64 ✓ 512 ? ✗
[6] S.D. VU 1.0 ASIC 64 ✓ 128-4096 ✓ ✗
[12] Spatz 1.0e
ASIC 32 ✗ 128-512 ✗ ✗
[9] Vicuna 0.10 FPGA 32 ✗ 128-2048 ✗ ✓
[7] Arrow 0.9 FPGA 32 ✗ ? ✓b
✗
[18] Johns et al. 0.8 FPGA 32 ✗ 32 ✗ ✗
[5] Vitruvius+ 0.7.1 ASIC 64 ✓ 16384 ✓ ✗
[10] XuanTie 910 0.7.1 ASIC 64 ✓ 128a
✓ ✗c
[19] RISC-V2
? ASIC ? ✗ 256 ✗ ✓d
[4] Ara 0.5 ASIC 64 ✓ 4096 a
✓ ✓
[20] Hwacha Non-Std. ASIC 64 ✓ 512a
✓ ✓
a
VLEN per lane.
b
VRF is split horizontally.
c
The vector unit is not open-source.
d
The scalar core is not open-source.
e
Limited subset of RVV.
executing the instruction with EWnew
vs . In Ara2, the reshuffle
is performed by the Slide Unit (SLDU).
Destination Registers RVV also mandates to support
a tail-undisturbed policy. When in place, the destination
elements past the last active one should not be modified.
When an EWnew
vd -instruction writes a vector register vd
previously encoded with EWold
vd ̸= EWnew
vd and the old content
of vd is not fully overwritten, the unmodified bytes would
get corrupted.
To avoid corrupting the tail elements, Ara2 has to match
the element width encoding with EWnew
vd . To do so, it deshuf-
fles the destination register using EWold
vd and reshuffles it back
using EWnew
vd by injecting a reshuffle operation (i.e., a vector
slide with null stride) into the SLDU before the offending
instruction. Since it is not possible to know how many bytes
need to be reshuffled unless both the vector length and
the element widths are dynamically tracked for each vector
register, the reshuffle acts on the whole register. No reshuffle
is injected when the offending instruction writes a whole
vector register. It is important to note that reshuffling hurts
performance if its latency cannot be hidden and if it precedes
slide or reduction instructions, which would suffer from
a structural hazard. The performance-aware programmer
should try to avoid reshuffling by always writing the vector
registers with the same Element Width (EW), e.g., by using
different vector registers to keep vectors with different EWs
when executing multiple mixed-width operations.
3 ARCHITECTURE
To achieve compliance with RVV 1.0, we added to [16] the
support for fixed-point arithmetic, floating-point reductions,
scalar element moves, missing mask instructions, indexed
permutations, and segmented memory operations. In Fig-
ure 1, we show the block diagram of the scalar core CVA6
and the vector unit Ara2. The architecture is based on Ara
[4], with the following major enhancements:
Decoding: With the new RISC-V V specifications, the
encoding of the vector instructions now fully specifies the
data type of the vector elements on which the instruction
operates. This allows moving most of the decoding logic and
OpQueues
Memory
Interconnect
VRF chunk
8 SRAM banks
VLSU
ADDRgen
VLDU
VSTU
Memory
ordering
ISSUE STALL
Scoreboard
Scoreboard
Issue
Fig. 1: Top-Level block diagram of the Ara2 system with the vector
co-processor (green), a more detailed diagram of the lane (magenta),
and the host scalar core CVA6 (blue).
vector-specific Control and State Registers (CSRs) from CVA6
to the vector unit. In the updated architecture, CVA6 keeps
only the pre-decoding logic strictly needed to know 1) if the
instruction is a vector instruction (to dispatch it to the vector
unit when it reaches the head of the scoreboard), 2) if the
vector instruction is a memory operation (to enforce cache
coherence), and 3) if the instruction needs a scalar value from
the integer or floating-point scalar register files.
The full decoding of the vector instructions is done
in Ara2’s dispatcher, which also contains the vector CSRs
and the byte layout encoding of each vector register. The
dispatcher checks if the decoded instruction is legal and,
if needed, injects reshuffle instructions. This is the only
place in which the LMUL parameter plays an important
role, as each lane’s operand requester sees the VRF as
a contiguous memory region from which fetching bytes.
Higher LMUL values will allow for higher vector lengths
and, when reading/writing the VRF, access more contiguous
bytes. At decoding time, entire sets of instructions are
aliased with the same decoded operation. The dispatcher
automatically aliases the whole register moves with regular
vector moves, modifying the vector length to always move a
whole register unconditionally. The architecture always uses
the undisturbed tail policy.
CV
A6-Vector Unit Interface: While decoding, CVA6 identi-
fies vector instructions, pushes them to a dispatcher queue,
and dispatches them to the accelerator once they are no
longer speculative. This helps the vector architecture avoid
expensive roll-back logic in case of mis-speculation. As
shown in Section 5, when dealing with medium-long vectors,
waiting until the instruction is known to be non-speculative
has a negligible impact on performance, as each instruction
keeps Ara2 busy for several cycles.
The interface between the host processor CVA6 and the
vector unit is generalized: the unit is implemented as a
modular accelerator with its own CSR file. The interface can
be divided into an instruction and a memory interface. The
former is a valid-ready request-response interface. CVA6
forwards the vector instruction and a maximum of two 64-bit
operands fetched from the integer or floating-point scalar
4
register file, together with an identifier. Ara2 answers with a
64-bit bus for the result and information about the occurred
exception when needed. The memory interface is composed
of control signals that help enforce memory ordering.
Memory Ordering and Coherence: CVA6 and the vector
unit have separate memory ports, and CVA6 has a private
L1 data cache. At the same time, the RISC-V ISA mandates
a strictly coherent memory view between the scalar and
vector processors. Ara [4] violates this requirement and
needs explicit memory fences that write back and invalidate
the CVA6 data cache between accesses on shared memory
regions, adding a significant performance overhead and
reducing code portability. In Ara2, we develop a hardware
mechanism to ensure coherence. We adapt the CVA6 L1 data
cache to a write-through policy so that the main memory,
which is accessed by the vector unit as well, is always up-
to-date. When the vector unit performs a vector store, it
invalidates the corresponding cache lines in the CVA6 data
cache. Moreover, we issue 1) scalar loads only if no vector
stores are in-flight, 2) scalar stores only if no vector loads or
stores are in-flight, and 3) vector loads or stores only if no
scalar stores are pending. CVA6 keeps track of the issued
loads and stores through dedicated counters. For example,
the vector store counter is increased when a vector store is
forwarded to the vector unit and decreased by the vector
unit every time a vector store is over. The memory interface
comprises signals to inform the scalar core that one vector
load or store is over and if there are pending stores. Thanks to
this mechanism, no memory disambiguation logic is needed
between vector memory operations and scalar stores (and
vice versa) since scalar/vector memory stores cannot collide
with other vector/scalar memory operations.
Segmented Memory Operations: Segmented memory opera-
tions can require non-negligible control logic and connections
when optimized for all the possible data widths and segment
values in a parametric lane-based architecture. Each Ara2
lane can send one 64-bit element per lane every cycle. During
a segmented memory operation, the memory bus often
contains more elements that map to the same lane. Thus,
we decided not to optimize these operations and load/store
only one element per cycle to simplify control and datapath.
Mask Unit: After the update to RVV 1.0, the mask bits
used by one lane can be stored in a different one. Thus, we
designed a Mask Unit, which can access all the lanes at once
to fetch, deshuffle at bit granularity, and dispatch the correct
mask bits to each lane. Moreover, the Mask Unit (MASKU)
combines the results of many vector mask instructions, such
as vcpop and vfirst. The introduction of an additional
unit that accesses all the lanes leads to a greater routing
complexity, especially when scaling up the number of lanes,
as already noticed in [4].
Optimized Slide Unit: The mask unit makes the physical
implementation effort harder due to its all-to-all connections
to/from the lanes. Reducing the complexity of each all-
to-all connected unit is paramount to ease the physical
implementation (placement and routing) of the system. A
preliminary study of how the area of the system scales with
the number of lanes shows that the most problematic block
is the slide unit, being the largest all-to-all connected unit
and scaling quadratically with the number of lanes. This is
expected, as the block supports slides by arbitrary amounts
Baseline SLDU
Output Byte 16
Input Bytes mapped to Output Byte 16
Input Bytes not mapped to Output Byte 16
L0 L1 L(N-1)
L0 L1 L(N-1)
enc_in
enc_out
slide
64 64 64
64 64 64
Output Byte 16
Input Bytes mapped to Output Byte 16
Fig. 2: Comparison between the baseline and the optimized slide units,
with a focus on how an arbitrary byte (15th) is mapped to the input
bytes. The baseline slide unit supports arbitrary slide amounts and can
slide and re-encode a vector in the same cycle. Each output byte is
mapped to every input byte, so that the total number of connections is
O(L2). In the optimized design, we support only power-of-two slides.
Moreover, slides and re-encoding cannot happen at the same time. The
total number of connections grows following an O(L×log2(L)) behavior.
-70%
-56%
Fig. 3: Number of 2-to-1 multiplexers needed to implement a slide
unit as a function of the number of lanes with different configurations.
An all-to-all slide unit connects every input byte to every output byte
and supports every slide and reshuffle operation in one cycle. Other
configurations support only slides by powers of two (SlideP2), slides by
one (Slide1), and can slide and reshuffle or either slide or reshuffle.
for element widths down to 8 bits by mapping the 8 × L
input bytes to the 8 × L output bytes. This interconnect can
be simplified by limiting the type of operations supported
by the unit. For example, we can constrain the datapath
to support only slide-by-1 or slide-by-power-of-two slide
instructions, with the other strides handled with multiple
micro-operations.
In Figure 3, we attach a plot showing the number of
2-to-1 multiplexers needed to implement the interconnect
with different slide unit configurations. This number is also
a lower bound to the number of wires that connect the
input bits before the slide to the output slided bits and is
a valid metric to estimate the area of the interconnect and
the wiring complexity during the routing stage. Since non-
power-of-two slides and reshuffling are uncommon, we limit
the strides fully supported in hardware to powers of two and
handle the remaining strides with micro-operations (i.e., by
decomposing the non-power-of-two-stride slide instruction
in power-of-two-stride slide operations), saving up to 70%
of the estimated area and wires, as shown in Figure 2.
Reductions Since our design has lanes, we implement
reductions using a 3-steps approach: intra-lane, inter-lane,
and SIMD reduction steps. The intra-lane reduction fully
exploits the data locality within each lane, maximizing the
ALU (or FPU) utilization and efficiency, reducing all the
elements already present in the lane. The inter-lane reduction
moves and reduces data among the lanes in log2(ℓ)+1 steps,
5
ℓ being the number of lanes, using the slide unit; since there
is a dependency feedback between the slide and ALU (or
FPU) units, the latency overhead of the communication is
paid at every step. Finally, the SIMD reduction reduces the
SIMD word, if needed; therefore, its latency logarithmically
depends on the element width.
Floating-point reductions need special care since the
FPU is pipelined. To keep the throughput at its maximum,
the internal pipeline registers of the FPU are used as
accumulators. During the intra-lane phase and after adding
the first two elements together, each FPU is constantly fed
with one operand per cycle. The other FPU input is either a
neutral value (zero for the addition) or one of the partial
sums coming from the FPU output, when available. In
the best case, after N/L cycles, each FPU pipeline register
contains a partial sum, and the reduction will be completed
in R × (1 + log2⌈R⌉) − (⌈R⌉ − R) − 1 cycles. Here, N is the
number of 64-bit packets of operands in the vector to reduce,
L is the number of lanes, and R is the number of FPU pipeline
stages. When R is a power of two, the formula simplifies
to R × (1 + log2(R)) − 1. Then, during both the inter-lane
and SIMD reductions, the FPU latency directly affects each
micro-operation. Since the number of FPU pipeline registers
increases with the EW, reductions on lower bit widths can
be faster than the ones on higher bit widths.
4 EXPERIMENT SETUP
In the following section, we describe our experiments in
detail, including the system configuration, tools, and metrics
used for performance characterization, physical implementa-
tion, and single-/multi-core trade-off evaluations. Then, we
outline the details of our benchmark pools and the rationale
behind selecting our kernels. In the following, we will use
the term system to refer to the system-under-test composed of
CVA6, its caches 2
, and Ara2. Ara2 and the L1 caches connect
to an SRAM memory 3
via the AXI memory interconnect
shown in Figure 1. The latency from a memory request to a
response is seven clock cycles for Ara2 and five for CVA6.
While analyzing a complex memory hierarchy is out of the
scope of this work, this simple configuration includes L1
caches and a standard system bus initiator with realistic
latency. This configuration enables us to account for the
latency of the next level of the memory hierarchy while
focusing on the characterization of the vector processor.
Performance analysis: We characterize the system’s
performance in terms of raw throughput ideality, which
identifies the ratio between the measured raw throughput
and the ideal maximum raw throughput achievable by the
vector processor for a particular kernel, only limited by
its maximum performance or its memory bandwidth. With
raw throughput, we identify the ratio between the number
of “useful” operations of an algorithm and the number
of clock cycles spent to execute it, counted from the first
vector instruction dispatched from CVA6 until the last vector
instruction fully executed by Ara2 (raw since there is no
frequency information). This metric helps study the ideality
of the design on different vector lengths (different problem
2. I$: 4 KiB, 4 sets, 128-bit line. D$: 8 KiB, 4 sets, 256-bit line
3. Memory: 2M words, 4 × L Byte/word, L being the number of lanes
sizes). Our experiment extends the performance analysis
in [16], which only focuses on two benchmarks run on a
4-lane Ara architecture. For our measurements, we run all
benchmarks on our vector system using a cycle-accurate
simulation, with all the benchmark instructions and data
preloaded in the SRAM main memory. We compile our code
with -O3 optimizations and use assembly vector instructions
or intrinsics within the vector kernels to decouple our exper-
iment from the current RISC-V vector compiler technology
and focus on the quality of the hardware.
We measure the performance of each benchmark for
different vector lengths (from 32 to 1024 Byte) and hardware
configurations (Ara2 with 2, 4, 8, and 16 lanes) to constitute
a baseline for further performance analyses.
What-if analyses: We repeat the performance measure-
ments by replacing CVA6 and its L1-caches with a FIFO
that contains the whole dynamic vector instruction trace of
the program in analysis and the correct scalar register file
entries to be forwarded to Ara2 if needed. This allows us
to determine the impact of the scalar part of the system
on the overall computation and set an upper bound on
performance gains achievable by streamlining the scalar sub-
system. In these conditions, performance is only limited by
the vector co-processor. Additionally, we track the number
of L1-cache misses to study the effect of scalar memory
system non-idealities on kernel performance. Finally, we
further streamline the vector processor with modifications
that would impact the vector processor hardware (e.g., by
aggressively upsizing the internal queues and scoreboard)
and study their impact on the system’s performance. If in
[16] we only showed that the scalar memory system and its
configuration have an influence on matrix multiplication’s
performance, the new set of experiments quantitatively
highlights the bottlenecks that limit performance, their
cause (scalar core, caches, or vector architecture), and the
performance effect of the Barber’s Pole VRF layout.
Physical implementation analysis: After synthesizing,
placing, and routing the system in 22nm FD-SOI technol-
ogy using industrial-grade tools, we evaluate its power,
performance, and area (PPA) metrics. The system includes
CVA6, its L1 caches, the invalidation filter, Ara2, and the
interconnects up to the system crossbar. To analyze the
switching activity of the netlist internal signals, we use a
cycle-accurate simulator to generate a VCD file with delay
back-annotations from the physical place-and-routed design.
We implement the full Ara2 system with 2, 4, 8, and 16 lanes
to study its scaling behavior and intrinsic limitations. The
input matrices for power simulations contain samples from
a uniform distribution over [0,1).
Multi-Core analysis: We then extend our analysis to
study how the vector core architecture behaves in a multi-
core environment and explore its performance/efficiency
trade-off. The system is modified to accommodate multiple
clusters of the previously implemented system, and the
SRAM main memory is multi-banked to support multiple
Ara2 instances, with one bank per Ara2 and every bank
with a parallelism of 4 × L Byte each, with L being the
number of lanes of each Ara2. Moreover, we implement a
lightweight synchronization engine via system-level CSRs
to let the clusters synchronize at the end of the execution.
The main objective is to evaluate the impact of the multi-core
6
vector architecture on performance and energy efficiency.
To do this, we vary the number of cores per cluster, the
number of lanes of each vector core, and the application
vector length of the floating-point matrix multiplication
algorithm. The modified kernel used in this phase is slightly
different from the one used in Section 5, and scalar caches are
not warmed up to ease the automatic VCD dumping script.
However, the comparison is still fair as all the configurations
run the same program.
We insert a synchronization point before and after the
kernel execution, measure performance and energy efficiency
within this time span, and simulate fmatmul between square
matrices with different sizes ranging from 4x4 to 256x256
elements on systems with {1, 2, 4, 8} cores and {2, 4, 8, 16}
lanes, with no more than 16 FPUs in total.
Benchmark selection: Table 2 summarizes the bench-
marks used to evaluate the Ara2 System’s performance. The
benchmarks include kernels from various domains, including
signal processing, linear algebra, and machine learning (ML).
The kernels were chosen to stimulate all the main units of
Ara2 and include both compute-bound and memory-bound
kernels. Here is a brief overview of each benchmark:
matmul and conv2d are two compute-bound kernels
used in multiple domains (Signal processing, linear algebra,
ML). Their performance behavior is crucial due to the kernels’
ubiquity. We re-used matmul from [4] and optimized the
3x7x7-kernel conv2d by keeping, after the initial setup
steps, seven output vectors in the VRF for every loaded
input vector, to maximize data reuse. fft and dwt are well-
known algorithms used in the signal processing domain.
We implement a vectorized version of fft by exploiting
the large Ara2 VRF to buffer all the input samples. This
avoids costly transfers to and from memory, in a similar
way as shown in Bertaccini et al. [21], and sets a limit to
128 × Lanes input samples (e.g., 2048 input samples with
16 Lanes). We take pathfinder, jacobi2d, and exp from
the RiVec benchmark suite repository [15], [22] since they
were the easiest ones to adapt to bare-metal C code, as the
suite was primarily developed to run on gem5 with OS
support. We tuned these three kernels to Ara2 by preloading
scalar coefficients in advance and exploiting Ara2’s large
VRF to buffer the vectors longer with the aid of assembly
instructions. Finally, we vectorized dropout, roi-align,
and softmax, three kernels used in the ML domain to
reduce neural network overfitting, extract a compact feature
map from individual regions of interest in detection tasks,
and calculate the final attention score at the end of a
neural network or transformer model, respectively. Also,
we included dotproduct since it does not expose multiple
dimensions for parallelization and forces using a reduction.
5 PERFORMANCE CHARACTERIZATION
In this section, we analyze the system’s performance and
how it changes with the system configuration, the scalar core,
the configuration of the scalar memory hierarchy, the number
of lanes, and the application vector length.
5.1 Lanes and Vector Length
When we scale up the Ara2 co-processor by doubling its num-
ber of lanes, we also double 1) its AXI bus data width and 2)
TABLE 2: Benchmarks used in the performance analysis.
Program Domain DType CB M S SMO IMO R Max Perf. [OP/cycle]
matmul Linear Algebra, ML FP64 Y N N N N N 1 × 2.0 × L
conv2d Signal Processing, ML FP64 Y N Y N N N 1 × 2.0 × L
dotproduct Linear Algebra FP64, int64 N N N N N Y 1 × 0.5 × L
jacobi2d Stencil FP64 Y N Y N N N 1 × 1.0 × L
dropout ML FP32 N Y N N N N 2 × 0.25 × L
fft Signal Processing FP32 Y Y Y N Y N 2 × 5/4 × L
dwt Signal Processing FP32 N N N Y N N 2 × 0.5 × L
pathfinder Routing Algorithm int32 Y Y N N N N 2 × 1.0 × L
exp Scientific, ML FP64 Y Y N N N N 1 × 30/23 × L
softmax ML FP32 Y N N N N Y 2 × 34/27 × L
roi-align ML FP32 N N N N N N 1 × 9/5 × L
CB: Compute Bound, M: Masks, S: Slides, SMO: Strided Mem. Ops., IMO: Indexed Mem. Ops.,
R: Reductions
the parallelism of the all-to-all internal units (MASKU, SLDU,
Vector Load/Store Unit (VLSU)). For a deeper understanding
of the performance scalability, Figure 4 shows the correlation
between the performance ideality of the Ara2 co-processor,
its number of lanes, and the application vector size, for two
different kernels: dotproduct and fmatmul. Specifically,
on the x-axis of the plots, we list different vector sizes (in
Byte), i.e., the number of vector elements times the element
size. For example, the entry (8L, 512 Byte) corresponds
to the performance ideality achieved by an 8-lane system
when dealing with vectors composed of 64 64-bit elements
each. When the ratio #Byte/#Lane is constant, the achieved
performance ideality is similar for systems with different
configurations. This means that the raw throughput almost
doubles when the number of lanes doubles if the number of
elements per lane is constant. This experiment shows that the
computation ideality of Ara2 is related to the ratio between
the application vector length and the number of lanes and
that a vector is short or long only depending on the vector
architecture on which will be processed. On the right, the
two heat plots visually remark the same concept, as entries
on the same diagonal (same byte-per-lane ratio) have similar
colors, i.e., similar performance.
Both analyzed kernels show a slight performance re-
gression for a constant byte-per-lane ratio. In the case of
the dotproduct, the performance decreases when increas-
ing the number of lanes because of the vector reduction
instruction, whose latency depends on the number of lanes
during the inter-lane phase. On the other hand, fmatmul
is computed on square matrices, and when the matrix size
increases, the arithmetic intensity increases as well. Moreover,
the performance drop of the 2L configuration at 16 and 32
Byte/Lane testifies that when the number of elements is too
low, the setup time of the kernel is less amortized.
5.2 Baseline System’s Performance
Figure 5 presents the performance ideality of the baseline
system across all benchmarks in our pool, varying the
application vector length. The darker the green shades in the
plot, the closer the system performance is to the ideal. As
noticed in Section 5.1, the ratio between the vector length
and the number of lanes significantly affects performance, as
shown by the 2-lane design reaching almost 70% of average
performance ideality with a 1KiB vector (512 Byte/lane),
while the 16-Lane system, with the same vector, would reach
only 33% (64 Byte/lane). This is apparent in the heatmaps,
where the darker colors shift right by one position every time
the lanes double.
7
Vector Size [B] Vector Size [B]
Lanes
Lanes
Raw Throughput Ideality Raw Throughput Ideality
fmatmul
dotproduct
Fig. 4: Correlation between Raw throughput Ideality and Byte/lane ratio
for dotproduct (left) and fmatmul (right). The raw throughput ideality
tends to be similar when the number of elements per lane is the same
(on the diagonals).
8-Lane Ara2 - Raw Throughput Ideality 16-Lane Ara2 - Raw Throughput Ideality
4-Lane Ara2 - Raw Throughput Ideality
2-Lane Ara2 - Raw Throughput Ideality
Fig. 5: Performance evaluation of the system with different configura-
tions and number of lanes on different kernels and vector lengths.
fft, dwt, softmax, and pathfinder perform below
average, even for high ratios of Byte/lanes, with softmax
suffering from the floating-point division data-dependent
latency and the large setup time for preloading the ap-
proximation function coefficients of the software-emulated
exponentiation. dwt is slowed down by misaligned strided
memory accesses, and fft by the indexed stores at the end
of the program. However, even considering these slower
kernels, the system achieves, on average, 50% of its raw
throughput ideality on all the kernels and configurations
starting from 128 Byte/Lane.
The Ara2 system achieves higher performance at lower
byte-per-lane ratios with the most crucial kernels like
fconv2d and fmatmul, reaching over 95% of its maximum
theoretical throughput starting from 128 Byte/Lane, or 75%
from 64 Byte/Lane.
5.3 Ideal Dispatcher System’s Performance
Replacing the scalar core (CVA6) with an ideal dispatcher
idealizes the scalar core, its memory system, and the non-
vectorial code. In this way, we can trace an upper bound
to the available performance achievable through the Ara2
system alone, abstracted from the scalar subsystem. With
an ideal dispatcher, the performance is no longer limited by
the issue-rate limitation described in [4], and CVA6 cannot
interfere with Ara’s memory transfers.
Figure 6 shows, for the 2- and 16-Lane system, the raw
throughput ideality gain we get by replacing CVA6 with
an ideal dispatcher. We report the plots for 64, 256, and
1024 elements. The yellow lines track the number of scalar
L1I-cache and L1D-Cache misses during the vector program
computation, from the first vector instruction to the last one.
When the number of Bytes per lane is lower than 8 (e.g.,
16-Lane Ara2 - 64B), the effective number of lanes is reduced
for 64-bit data kernels since there are not enough elements
to fill all the lanes, and the real maximum performance
achievable is the maximum performance multiplied by
the number of elements per lane. In this condition, the
performance is not limited by CVA6.
When the number of Bytes per lane is lower than 64
(2-Lane Ara2 - 64B and 16-Lane Ara2 - 256B), the effective
number of banks used in each lane is reduced from eight to
the number of elements per lane for the 64-bit data kernels,
especially if we do not implement a Barber Pole’s VRF layout.
For example, if the vector length is 128B and the system has
16 lanes, only one bank per lane is effectively used; all the
read and write operations will target the same bank in each
lane, increasing the probability of conflicts. Since multiple
PEs experience a stall when they try to access the same bank
simultaneously, and the conflict probability grows when we
reduce the number of banks, these configurations are slowed
down by more bank stalls. The lower the byte-per-lane ratio,
the more impact a bank stall will have on the final runtime.
In this region, we see that some kernels moderately
benefit from the ideal dispatcher. This also happens when the
number of elements grows until the number of byte-per-lane
becomes sufficiently long to peak performance, and the non-
idealities of the scalar core and memory system are almost
completely amortized by Ara2.
fmatmul, fconv2d, and jacobi2d greatly benefit from
the ideal dispatcher, showing a correlation between the D-
Cache misses and their performance increase when CVA6 is
replaced with an ideal dispatcher. To prove the correlation,
we simulate the three kernels on a 16-Lane System with 128
elements (1024 Byte), idealizing the cache system so that it
always hits. Figure 7 shows the results. With an ideal cache
system, the three kernels virtually perform as when executed
by the ideal-dispatcher system, which shows the importance
of the scalar memory system for kernels that heavily rely on
operand forwarding between the scalar and the vector core.
Since Ara2’s memory coherence logic invalidates a whole
cache set per address index, the cache placement policy
matters, especially for problems whose data that transit
through the scalar core can be fully contained in the cache,
like fconv2d. In this case, the larger the set (i.e., higher
associativity), the more lines can be (unnecessarily) inval-
idated. fmatmul, instead, requires the whole matrix A to
pass through the L1 scalar d-cache. Since a 128x128 matrix
does not fit the cache, the invalidation system generates
mandatory capacity misses. In this case, larger cache lines
reduce the number of misses since more elements are cached
with every refill request.
Optimizing the memory hierarchy is out of the scope
of this work; however, we note that a more intrusive tag-
based invalidation logic would help solve the unnecessary
invalidations that occur with smaller problems, and increased
AXI widths for cache refills would lower the miss penalty
8
Fig. 6: Scalar cache misses and performance gain when CVA6 is replaced by an ideal dispatcher, varying the number of lanes in the Ara2 system
and the number of elements in the vector, measured in bytes.
Fig. 7: Performance comparison of a 16-Lane System with 64B/Lane
among three different configurations: a) Baseline System, b) Baseline
System with ideal CVA6 data-cache, c) System with ideal dispatcher.
and help all the kernels. Also, hardware or software cache
prefetching would be useful to mitigate the effects of cache
misses for problems with relatively low byte-per-lane ratios.
Finally, exp and roi-align slightly benefit from the
ideal dispatcher because of the non-negligible amount of
housekeeping scalar code in the program.
5.4 Further Performance Considerations
In the following paragraphs, we discuss the effect of further
system/level and microarchitectural modifications used in
vector processors that can impact performance and identify
the main performance drivers that can boost the system’s
performance with low Byte/Lane ratios.
5.4.1 VRF Layout
The current instance of Ara2 does not implement Barber’s
Pole VRF layout, which was originally introduced to avoid
the initial stalls that every vector instruction with at least
two source registers would experience [4]. These stalls are
especially critical for short-vector applications where each
vector instruction lasts for fewer cycles.
Barber’s Pole does not always reduce the number of
runtime stalls, though. Highly regular applications such as
fmatmul suffer more stalls when implementing this byte
layout and dealing with vectors that are sufficiently long
to amortize the initial stalls. Without Barber’s Pole, when
an application is highly regular, and the vector processor
receives enough computational vector instructions to keep
its operand requesters busy, the VRF experiences a regular
access pattern during execution, especially when the vector
length is multiple of the number of banks in a lane. After the
first stalls, the source operand requesters make their requests
in an interleaved fashion, once per cycle, without conflicting
anymore. When an instruction is over, and the next one
starts, the pattern is preserved since the previous instruction
issued its last request to the last VRF bank, while the next
instruction will ask an operand to bank 0 one cycle later.
Instead, with Barber’s Pole layout, the next instruction will
likely start its requests from a different bank that depends
on the new source register. This uncertainty perturbates the
bank access pattern and creates new stalls.
Figure 8 shows this effect. We report the baseline system
performance with and without Barber’s Pole for fmatmul,
varying the number of elements. We also report the same
comparison but with CVA6 replaced by the ideal dispatcher.
Since the trends are similar, we can focus on the baseline
system. Barber’s Pole has a positive effect on performance
up to 16 double-precision elements (32 Byte per lane), as
it increases the number of effective banks used in each
lane. From 32 elements (64 Byte/lane, i.e., the effective
number of banks is the same as the physical number of
banks), the performance is decreased due to the newly
introduced conflicts. The longer the vector, the less frequent
the introduced stalls happen, as the fetch from the same
source registers is not perturbed by Barber’s Pole. Barber’s
Pole effect on performance is mainly driven by the number of
Bytes per lane; therefore, shorter data widths will experience
the negative effect of this byte layout at higher vector lengths.
Since Barber’s Pole layout increases the complexity of the
9
hardware that calculates the VRF addresses and can hurt
performance when handling long vectors, we decided not to
implement it in Ara2.
5.4.2 Main Performance Drivers
To fully characterize Ara2’s performance, we studied its
behavior when further optimized with modifications that
can highly impact its PPA metrics. To amortize the setup time
of the internal pipeline when the byte-per-lane ratio is low,
Ara2 needs to have larger buffers at each step of its pipeline.
We artificially increased the size of the instruction buffers
for each internal unit and the number AXI cut-registers
from/to Ara’s load-store unit. Moreover, we changed the
way in which the hazards on the load unit and slide unit
are handled, complicating the internal control but allowing
for faster hazard resolution. To further decrease the number
of stalls, another possible change would be to duplicate the
window of simultaneous instructions handled within Ara2
from 8 to 16. All these changes impact the area and timing
of a design that requires careful optimizations to balance
the timing paths; therefore, they are only used now as a
comparison point for more viable solutions presented in
Section 7.
Figure 9 shows the performance of the optimized system
compared to the baseline. We also report the system, in both
configurations, attached to an ideal dispatcher. The black
lines represent the issue-rate limitation, i.e., the intrinsic
performance limitation due to the non-ideal rate at which the
scalar core issues the vector instructions to Ara2. We can see
that the optimized system with the ideal dispatcher is not
limited by the issue-rate limitation and gets a non-negligible
performance boost for a vector 32, 64, and 128 bytes long
(up to 32 Byte/lane) if compared with the baseline with the
ideal dispatcher and with the current system baseline. On the
other hand, we can see that the current system, coupled with
CVA6, suffers from multiple problems with short vectors.
Namely, the fact that the housekeeping code overhead and
the setup time weigh more when the runtime is shorter
(smaller problem size).
Figure 10 summarizes the results of the performance
analysis, analyzing the various sources of inefficiencies for
the current system. Ara’s performance, when dealing with
shorter vectors, is limited by multiple factors that depend on
the vector length. We merged more contributions when their
combined effect was way higher than their effects added
(64B, 128B cases). CVA6 highly penalizes the 64B case only
if Ara2 is optimized; otherwise, its inefficiencies are hidden
by Ara’s ones. We also want to highlight that the CVA6- and
Cache-related columns are upper bounds to the system’s
performance. Further optimizations would require a heavy
re-design of the system, as the most impactful optimizations
are the merged ones (violet and orange columns). The effect
of the Ara2 inefficiencies on performance drops below 5%
from 256B on, demonstrating the computational efficiency of
the architecture for medium-long vectors.
6 PHYSICAL IMPLEMENTATION
We summarize the system implementation results in Table 3,
while Table 4 presents the performance, power, and energy
Fig. 8: Barber’s Pole layout performance effects during a matrix
multiplication (8 Byte/element). Small benefits exist for shorter vectors,
while medium-long vectors suffer from it.
Fig. 9: Performance analysis with further Vector Processor streamlining
when executing a matrix multiplication (8 Byte/element). The issue-rate
limitation is a hard limit only for the system with CVA6 (opaque lines).
efficiency analysis for a matmul on different data types.
Figure 11 shows the 8-lane place-and-routed design.
Table 5 shows the area breakdown of the system and the
cost of supporting arbitrary strides during slide operations
compared with the optimized system, which supports only
power-of-two strides and time-multiplexes the slide and
reshuffle operations, as explained in Section 3. When scaling
up, the all-to-all unoptimized (old) slide unit becomes the
largest non-lane block from four lanes on, growing exponen-
tially with the lanes and dominating the 8-lane design. The
mask unit only needs to support reshuffling and generate an
Fig. 10: Main sources of inefficiency. Ara2’s architecture especially limits
short vectors from 32 to 128 Byte (up to 32 B/lane), while caches play
an important role for 128 and 256 Byte vectors. Kernel: floating-point
matrix multiplication (8 Byte/element).
10
TABLE 3: Physical implementation metrics in 22nm FD-SOI. In brackets,
the increment w.r.t. the same architecture with half the lanes.
Metric (factor) 2 Lanes 4 Lanes 8 Lanes 16 Lanes 16 Lanes*
SS Freq. [GHz] 950 960 (1.0×) 940 (1.0×) 750 (0.8×) 860 (0.9×)
TT Freq. [GHz] 1.35 1.35 (1.0×) 1.35 (1.0×) 1.08 (0.8×) 1.26 (0.9×)
Die Area [mm2
] 0.59 0.95 (1.6×) 1.88 (2.0×) 4.47 (2.4×) 4.47 (2.4×)
Cell+Macro Area [kGE] 2291 3688 (1.6×) 6768 (1.8×) 14773 (2.2×) 12864 (1.9×)
Macro Area [kGE] 557 769 (1.4×) 1180 (1.5×) 2010 (1.7×) 2010 (1.7×)
Cell Area [kGE] 1733 2919 (1.7×) 5587 (1.9×) 12763 (2.3×) 10854 (1.9×)
En. Eff.** [FLOPSDP/W] 34.1 37.8 (1.1×) 35.7 (0.9×) — 30.3 (0.8×)
* No fixed-point support, minimal mask unit.
** fmatmul between 256x256 matrices, at typical corner
TABLE 4: Performance, power, and energy efficiency for different kernels
for a 4-lane design, at 1.35 GHz, in typical conditions, and 2KiB vectors.
Program Elements Power [mW] Performance [GOPS] Efficiency [GOPS/W]
fmatmul64 256 283 10.7 37.8
fmatmul32 512 238 21.4 90.0
fmatmul16 1024 218 42.8 195.9
imatmul64 256 272 10.4 38.3
imatmul32 512 245 20.9 85.2
imatmul16 1024 231 41.8 181.0
imatmul8 2048 222 83.5 376.0
enable signal at bit granularity; however, no all-to-all input-
to-output byte mapping is required. The load and store units
quickly increase their size when scaling up the system but
at a lower pace thanks to their limited memory bandwidth
(4 × L Byte/cycle), which is half of the byte throughput of
the main computational units (8 × L Byte/cycle) and needs
L2
2 connections. Between these two units, the load unit is
the most problematic since its interconnect is duplicated
to connect the input AXI memory bytes to the two-entry
result queue. The store unit, instead, connects the input
register to the AXI bytes directly. The optimized slide unit
shows a linear increase, with an area reduction of 83% with
respect to the unoptimized one. The greater reduction in area
w.r.t. the predicted one can be explained by the diminished
routing density that was effectively dominating the unit area.
Looking at the 16-lane design with the new slide unit, we see
the mask unit and load unit exploding in size and hindering
the system’s scalability.
Key insights: Designing an RVV vector processor able
to scale up to 16 lanes implies taking into account phys-
ical implementation constraints in the micro-architecture
specification and design. Increasing the Byte/Lane ratio
provides diminishing performance returns that eventually
peak. After that point, increasing the VRF size to allow for
higher Byte/Lane ratios is no longer convenient. Indeed,
we reduced the VRF from [4] by 4 without significantly
impacting performance, as shown in Section 5.
Supporting multiple element widths on wide datapaths
makes the interconnects very wire-intensive, and feasibility
can only be explored through full placement and routing. The
old SLDU interconnect area scaled up by 5× when doubling
the lanes from 8 to 16. With dedicated optimizations, its area
now consistently scales by just ∼2×, allowing the architecture
to scale up further.
Ara2 implements a physical VRF byte layout that eases
mixed-width operations but requires reshuffling, as opposed
to designs such as [5]. The new SLDU demonstrates that the
reshuffling logic can be implemented with negligible impact.
The memory protocol influences the complexity of the
memory-to-VRF interconnects. AXI can return misaligned
elements on the bus, even if the first requested byte (variable
TABLE 5: Ara2’s area breakdown and scale-up behavior. In brackets,
the area scaling factor w.r.t. the same block in Ara2 with half the lanes.
Thanks to the optimization of the SLDU, the MASKU and Vector Load
Unit (VLDU) are the main units whose area skyrockets during the
system upscaling. When we remove most of the shuffling functions from
the MASKU, its area is reduced by 60% in a 16-lane design.
Area [kGE] (factor) 2 Lanes 4 Lanes 8 Lanes 16 Lanes 16 Lanes*
CVA6 894 896 (1.0×) 906 (1.0×) 904 (1.0×) 904 (1.0×)
Lane 612 617 (1.0×) 626 (1.0×) 628 (1.0×) 573 (0.9×)
Dispatcher 16 17 (1.1×) 19 (1.1×) 23 (1.2×) 20 (1.1×)
Sequencer 14 15 (1.1×) 17 (1.2×) 29 (1.6×) 29 (1.6×)
MASKU 38 97 (2.5×) 300 (3.1×) 1105 (3.7×) 442 (1.5×)
ADDRGEN 35 36 (1.0×) 44 (1.2×) 59 (1.3×) 60 (1.4×)
VLDU 15 45 (3.0×) 212 (4.7×) 1286 (6.1×) 1135 (5.4×)
VSTU 8 21 (2.8×) 64 (3.1×) 332 (5.2×) 342 (5.3×)
New SLDU 24 48 (2.0×) 94 (2.0×) 196 (2.1×) 190 (2.1×)
Old SLDU 39 131 (3.4×) 577 (4.4×) 2900 (5.0×) 2860 (5.0×)
* No fixed-point support, minimal mask unit.
L0
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
L6
L7
CVA6
I$
D$
MASKU
VLSU
SLDU
DISP
SEQ
Fig. 11: Floorplan of the 8-lane Ara2 implementation.
position) maps to a fixed location (the first VRF byte). Indeed,
the VLSU complexity scales superlinearly with the number
of lanes by 3×, 4.7×, and 6.1× because of this interconnect
and will be the target of future optimizations.
7 MULTI-CORE ANALYSIS
In this section, we analyze the performance and energy
efficiency trade-off for different system configurations (single-
core and multi-core) as a function of the application’s vector
length. The analysis from Section 6 suggests that 16 lanes
are a hard limit due to congestion and routing challenges
in the all-to-all units of the vector processor. Moreover, a
CVA6
V0
V0
2-lane Ara
4-lane Ara
VRF
L0
L1
L0
L1 L0
L1
L2
L3
2*Len
VRF VRF
2-lane Ara
V0
V16
CVA6 CVA6
Len
2 Elm/Lane
1 Elm/Lane
Len
Matrix
Len
2 Elm/Lane
Fig. 12: Comparison of a single-core 4-lane Ara2 system architecture
and a two-core architecture made of 2-lane Ara2 processors. Both
configurations have 4 FPUs in total. Vector processors exploit one
dimension only, while a multi-core system can parallelize on multiple
dimensions. This allows the multi-core system to reach a higher
Byte/Lane ratio when the vectorizable dimension is shorter than the size
of a vector register and the application exposes an additional dimension.
11
single-core vector processor needs to buffer longer vectors
exposed by the application on a single dimension to scale
up performance and efficiency when its number of lanes
increases, by keeping the same byte-per-lane ratio. However,
not all applications expose long vectors on one dimension.
A multi-core system offers flexibility in exploiting different
parallelization dimensions at the cost of synchronization and
memory-transfer overheads, as reported in Figure 12. The
experiment includes four systems with the same number of
FPUs (16), ranging from a single-core 16-lane Ara2 system to
a multi-core system consisting of eight 2-lane Ara2 systems
coupled with eight CVA6 instances. The results, depicted
in Figures 13, 14, and 15, showcase the raw throughput
(FLOP/Cycle), real throughput (FLOPS), and energy effi-
ciency (FLOPS/W) of the various system configurations.
7.1 Performance
The raw throughput allows for evaluating the system’s per-
formance abstracted from the physical implementation. For
medium/short vectors (8, 16, 32, 64 64-bit elements), multi-
core systems composed of smaller instances outperform
those with fewer but larger vector cores. This is due to the
exploitation of another dimension of parallelization, allowing
for a byte-per-lane ratio increase. In contrast, as the problem
size increases, the FPUs are fully utilized even with the
maximum number of lanes. The dual-core 8-lane and single-
core 16-lane systems surpass the others at vector lengths of
128 and 256 elements, respectively, as the synchronization
overhead and pressure on the memory system decrease
with fewer cores. Extremely small problem sizes (8x8x8)
suffer from the program setup time because of their lower
arithmetic intensity and shorter runtime.
Issue rate limitation: Thanks to the RVV specification
update, the number of assembly instructions in the main
loop of a matmul drops from four to three, bringing the
issue rate of vfmacc instructions from five to four cycles per
vfmacc (the scalar coefficient can now be forwarded with
the vfmacc). As shown in Figure 13, this new implicit scalar
forwarding contributes to pushing the issue-rate-limitation
line [4] to the left. However, the non-ideal issue rate of CVA6
still limits performance for medium-short vectors.
The multi-core vector architecture helps overcome the
issue-rate limitation. While the single-core 16-lane Ara2
system cannot theoretically go beyond 16 DP-GFLOP/cycle
when operating on 32x32x32 matrices, all the multi-core
instances with 16 FPUs exceed this value, with the 8-core
2-lane system reaching 23.6 DP-GFLOP/cycle. This happens
since the maximum performance of a 2-lane Ara2 system is
lower than the issue-rate limitation. Intuitively, having more
scalar cores makes the total issue rate increase, too. Also, a
multi-core design with smaller Ara2 instances behaves better
than a single-core larger Ara2 with the same number of FPUs
coupled with an ideal scalar core and memory subsystem,
even if the latter system is not affected by the issue-rate
limitation. This result is shown in Figure 13.
The previous analysis is valid if the application exposes
two dimensions of parallelization. The applications that ex-
pose only one parallelizable dimension will always perform
better on a single-core larger implementation, as the multi-
core architecture will not help increase the byte-per-lane ratio
and will pay the synchronization price.
As shown in Figure 14, the overall picture of the sys-
tem’s performance does not change when we take into
consideration the real throughput of the various systems
by considering the maximum frequencies of the physical
implementations for the designs up to 8 lanes. The 16-lane
system experiences a non-negligible frequency drop that
penalizes the whole computation, which becomes slower
than all the other designs for all the different vector lengths.
7.2 Energy efficiency
With the multi-core system, we waste the energy of the
replicated scalar cores and their memory transfers. This
fact is counter-balanced by the different energy efficiencies
reached by the physical implementations of the systems with
a different lane count. As shown in Section 6, the 4-lane
design is the most efficient system, followed by the 8-lane,
2-lane, and 16-lane ones. The multi-core overhead and the
different efficiencies of the implementations allow the 4-core
4-lane design to be the most efficient one, reaching more
than 39 DP-GFLOPS/W on a 256x256x256 problem. The
2-core 8-lane system immediately follows with almost 38
DP-GFLOPS/W on the same problem, thanks to a lower
multi-core related power overhead. As expected, the 8-core
2-lane system shows an efficiency from 5% to 18% lower
than the 4-core, suffering both from the lower efficiency of
the single 2-lane Ara2 systems and the maximum number
of cores in the system, with the related overhead. The 16-
lane system suffers from the specification update and the
additional all-to-all connected unit that degrades the overall
energy efficiency. Nevertheless, it overtakes the 8-core 2-lane
system on the largest problem size.
In Figures 17 and 18, we present a log-log summary of the
previous diagrams. Colors indicate the number of FPUs, and
shapes indicate the number of lanes of each Ara2 instance
that makes up the multi-core system. The more complex the
shape, the higher the number of lanes per core.
The larger systems with fewer cores take over the
configurations with smaller cores (simple shapes on the plot)
when the number of FPUs is constant (same color on the plot)
when the vector length is increased, meaning that having
more lanes in the single instances is more beneficial with
longer vectors, as we noticed before.
The plots show that for smaller vectors, many smaller
vector processors are better than a large one that cannot
effectively exploit all the dimensions of parallelism present
in the application. If we take this to the limit, we see that
with extremely short vectors (i.e., 1 or 2 elements), having
a vector processor does not make sense, and a multi-core
CVA6 scalar system would be more performant and efficient.
8 COMPARISON WITH SOA
8.1 Performance
As already noticed in Section 1, it is not easy to compare our
performance metrics with the SoA since the benchmarking is
often done on a very limited number of kernels and because
the software implementation is not available. Moreover, the
metrics are not always clearly defined. In [5], we could
not find the definition of the throughput metric and the
lengths of the application vectors. For this reason, we
12
Fig. 13: A multi-core implementation helps
overcome the issue-rate limitation for small
vectors (fmatmul).
Fig. 14: Multi- and single-core through-
put for different 16-FPU configurations
of the Ara2 system in typical conditions
(fmatmul).
Fig. 15: Multi- and single-core energy effi-
ciency for different 16-FPU configurations
of the Ara2 system in typical conditions
(fmatmul).
Fig. 16: Performance comparison of multi-
and single-core 16-FPU Systems (fmatmul).
In the last column of each set, CVA6 is
replaced by the Ideal Dispatcher.
Fig. 17: Throughput comparison of single-
and multi-core vector architectures with 2, 4,
8, and 16 FPUs (fmatmul).
Fig. 18: Energy Efficiency comparison of
single- and multi-core vector architectures
with 2, 4, 8, and 16 FPUs (fmatmul).
fmatmul, fconv2d
16 32 64 112 128 256
Fig. 19: Performance comparison between Ara2 and Ara.
assume them to be the longest possible, i.e., at least 256
DP-Elements per vector (256 Byte/Lane). The 8-lane Ara2
system is almost as performant as Vitruvius+ even with
a 80KiB/32KiB = 2.5× smaller VRF and no register-
renaming features. Indeed, it gets the same performance
for matmul and pathfinder, while Ara2’s FFT is 1.3×
faster even for a lower byte-per-lane ratio (128 against 256).
jacobi2d’s performance is hard to compare as it is unclear
how the authors calculated the throughput metric, getting
more than what we consider the maximum throughput
for that kernel (8 DP-FLOP/cycle). Figure 19 shows the
performance comparison between Ara2 and Ara on the two
kernels benchmarked in [4]. Ara2 is consistently faster than
its counterpart (except with the 16-lane convolution) despite
implementing more instructions than Ara and an up-to-date
RVV 1.0 ISA specification. As highlighted in Section 8.2,
this was possible thanks to targeted micro-architectural
optimizations that eased the datapath’s timing and reduced
its area while preserving performance, e.g., the slide unit and
the reduced VRF, and allowed Ara2 to boost its maximum
frequency, especially at higher lane counts. Other than that,
the comparison with Hwacha done in [4] is still valid, as no
updated results have been published.
The comparison with Vicuna [9] is especially hard since
it is a 32-bit integer-only vector core. Its medium and fast
configurations have the same computational capabilities, in
terms of total throughput, of a 2-lane and 16-lane Ara2 sys-
tems. The reported utilization results are relative to two 8-bit
fmatmul whose sizes are comparable with a 256 × 32 × 256
and a 1024 × 128 × 1024 64-bit fmatmul problems. Our
results refer to 32x32x32 and 128x128x128 matrices, and this
makes the comparison unfair, as increasing the other two
dimensions boosts the utilization. Nevertheless, the 2-lane
Ara2 system shows virtually the same utilization. Our 16-lane
system, instead, lags behind (∼30% vs. ∼60%), especially
when executing the smaller problem. This is mainly due
to the size of Ara’s D-Cache, 16× smaller than Vicuna’s
in the same configuration. Spatz [12], an integer vector
processor coupled with Snitch [23], is able to reach almost
70% utilization with eight cores and 2 Image Processing
Units (IPUs) per core, while Ara2 reaches 30% for the same
problem size. However, Spatz is a 32-bit integer-only vector
architecture, and all the benchmark data are kept in the low
latency L1 memory, which eliminates miss-related stalls.
We report a comparison with commercial processors, even
if their performance comes from fact sheets and experimental
conditions are not peer-reviewed. The Andes NX27V can
compute a 32x32 32-bit fmatmul in ∼4800 cycles using
a 32-bit vector processor with a datapath of 256-bit [24].
This is 85% of its max performance. A 4-lane Ara2 has
13
the same 256-bit datapath while being a 64-bit processor.
With a 64-bit 32x32 fmatmul, it gets 76% of its maximum
performance, which grows to 94% with a 64x64 problem.
The Intelligence X280 can reach extremely high throughput
with dedicated extensions on 8-bit low-precision int and 16-
bit floating-point matrix multiplications, higher than Ara2’s
maximum throughput. However, there is no information
about performance for wider data types [8]. As for Arm SVE,
the Fujitsu A64FX reaches 90% utilization on DGEMM [25], but
we could not find information on the problem size.
Lastly, we can compare Ara2’s and CVA6’s performance.
Comparing the vector performance against naive scalar
code would unfairly favor Ara2 (e.g., 2-lane Ara2’s speedup
against naive scalar fmatmul: 70× for 128x128 matrices).
Since a 2-lane Ara2 scores more than 90% of its maximum
performance with a 32x32 fmatmul, we can confidently say
that the speedup over the scalar code is at least 2× from this
problem size on, as vanilla scalar cores struggle to reach peak
FPU utilization without complex superscalar out-of-order
support or significant instruction extensions. For example, in
[23], a Snitch core reaches near-peak utilization with 32x32
problems only with the ad-hoc SSR and FREP ISA extensions
enabled. Without them, Snitch is an in-order scalar core, and
its utilization drops below 25%. For a direct comparison on
a memory-bound kernel, we optimized a scalar dot product.
The 2-lane Ara2 speedup over CVA6 for a floating-point dot
product with 128 elements is 1.4× because of the memory
bandwidth limit and the high FPU latency paid at the end
of the intra-lane reduction phase. Indeed, the integer dot
product speedup in the same conditions is 2.2×.
8.2 Power, Performance, Area
The novel Ara2 architecture boosts the design’s operational
frequency up to 15% (i.e., 8 lanes) compared to Ara [4], with a
critical path of ∼40 FO4 inverter delays for the 4-lane design.
Its area is 2%, 7%, 15%, and 37% higher than Ara’s with
2, 4, 8, and 16 lanes, respectively. This is due to the newly
introduced functionality, coupled with a 4× size reduction
of the VRF. The MASKU, introduced to keep the architecture
compliant with RVV, decreases the implementation efficiency
of the whole design starting from 8 lanes and a visible area,
and energy-efficiency degradation hinders a further scale-up.
Further study on the MASKU and VLDU is needed to reduce
their footprint without hitting the system’s performance.
E.g., the data of the VLDU can be aligned before entering
the system, easing the routing in the unit. On the other
hand, a complete 8-lane Ara2 system (CVA6, Ara2, scalar
caches) reaches virtually the same frequency and area as
a Vitruvius+ instance alone without the scalar core and
memories (1.4 GHz, 1.3 mm2
) [5].
Comparing the energy efficiency across different imple-
mentations is hard due to the sensitivity that the power
consumption has with respect to the input data distribution.
E.g., executing the same 256x256x256 fmatmul kernel on our
4-lane Ara2 System can lead to energy efficiencies from 38.8
to 65 GFLOPSDP/W depending on the input distribution.
Using a normal distribution with mean 0 and variance 1,
instead of a uniform one between [0,1), also leads to a 7.5%
power difference. In this scenario, comparing our energy
efficiency with Vitruvius+ is hard, as the paper does not
S1
Clean-up
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S3
Load
vectors
and
Bump
pointers
S4
Element-wise
vmacc
S2
Stripmining
setup
S6
Horizontal
reduction
S5
Stripmining
management
S6
Return
RISC-V V 1.0 Arm SVE
Fig. 20: Comparison between RVV 1.0 and Arm SVE assembly.
report the used input number distribution, and it is not clear
if the power figures consider the scalar core and memories
too, as we do. Moreover, we could not reproduce the number
reported in their comparison tables. A comparison with Spatz
is also nontrivial, as the architecture is a 32-bit integer only,
leading to substantially lower power figures.
8.3 RVV vs. Arm SVE
In Figure 20, we report a comparison between an RVV 1.0
and Arm SVE simplified dotproduct in assembly. The
instruction count is 7 + 9N and 6 + 7N for RISC-V and
Arm, respectively, where N is the number of iterations of
the strip-mining loop. Arm’s complex addressing scheme
allows loading a vector and bumping the address pointer
in one instruction, while RVV needs three. Also, Arm does
not need to clear the scalar result register in S6. However,
RISC-V can set up the strip-mining loop and get the effective
vector length in just one instruction and, in this example,
exploit its bnez compare-and-branch, which Arm splits into
two instructions. Overall, Arm’s slight advantage comes
from its CISC-like addressing; this observation points to
opportunities for further optimization to be tackled with
future RVV extensions.
9 CONCLUSION
In this work, we presented Ara2, the first open-source RVV
1.0 vector architecture. We implement the design with 2,
4, 8, and 16 lanes in 22nm FD-SOI technology and reach
1.35 GHz (for 8 and fewer lanes) thanks to a new lightweight
SLDU datapath able to reduce the interconnect wiring and
hardware cost of the all-to-all byte-connected unit by 70%.
For compliance with RVV, Ara2 requires a new all-to-all
connected MASKU to support the modified VRF layout of
the mask vectors, complicating the physical implementation.
This, together with the newly supported features like floating-
point reductions, make the 4-lane configuration become the
most efficient design point, with an SoA energy efficiency of
almost 39 GFLOPSDP/W during a matrix multiplication.
The flexible Ara2 architecture reaches, on average, more
than 50% of its throughput ideality starting from 128 Bytes
per lane on the whole benchmark pool with every system
configuration. Furthermore, with only a 64 byte-per-lane
ratio, it achieves more than 75% of its maximum throughput
on the most crucial kernels like matrix multiplications and
convolutions and more than 90% from 128 Byte/Lane. We
also investigate the detrimental impact of the Barber’s Pole
layout on long-vector performance and thoroughly analyze
14
the primary performance drivers of the vector architecture,
including the scalar core and its memory system.
To overcome the issue-rate performance limitation, we
evaluate multi-core vector architectures, which show that
smaller vector core instances can boost the performance of
applications that expose more than one dimension of par-
allelization (e.g., matmul), especially when the vectorizable
dimension cannot provide high byte-per-lane ratios, with
performance improvements up to 3x when compared to a
single-core architecture with the same overall computation
capability. This is especially beneficial when the system
cannot exploit the advantages of long vectors, e.g., when
the application does not expose them on a single dimension.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the ETH Future Computing
Laboratory (EFCL), financed by a gift from Huawei Technolo-
gies, and by the TRISTAN (101095947) project that received
funding from the HORIZON CHIPS-JU programme.
REFERENCES
[1] R. M. Russell, “The CRAY-1 computer system,” Commun. ACM,
vol. 21, no. 1, p. 63–72, 1978.
[2] Fujitsu, “How world-first technology is unleashing
higher processing speeds for AI’s ever-rising
computational needs,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://corporate-blog.global.fujitsu.com/fgb/2020-02-03/how-
world-first-technology-is-unleashing-higher-processing-speeds-
for-ais-ever-rising-computational-needs/
[3] J. Ma et al., “An analytical framework for estimating scale-out
and scale-up power efficiency of heterogeneous manycores,” IEEE
Transactions on Computers, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 367–381, 2016.
[4] M. Cavalcante et al., “Ara: A 1-GHz+ scalable and energy-efficient
RISC-V vector processor with multiprecision floating-point sup-
port in 22-nm FD-SOI,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale
Integration, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 530–543, 2020.
[5] F. Minervini et al., “Vitruvius+: An area-efficient RISC-V decoupled
vector coprocessor for high performance computing applications,”
ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1–25, 2023.
[6] R. Espasa, “Introducing SemiDynamics high bandwidth RISC-
V IP cores,” RISC-V Global Forum 2020, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.european-processor-initiative.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2021/03/202012.RISCV-SUMMIT.pdf
[7] I. A. Assir et al., “Arrow: A RISC-V vector accelerator for machine
learning inference,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07169, 2021.
[8] SiFive Intelligence X280, SiFive Corp., San Mateo,
CA, USA, 2022, revision 21G3. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://sifive.cdn.prismic.io/sifive/62e0df53-be02-4b50-
b211-aa55b7042fc8 x280-datasheet-21G3.pdf
[9] M. Platzer and P. Puschner, “Vicuna: A timing-predictable RISC-
V vector coprocessor for scalable parallel computation,” in 33rd
ECRTS, ser. LIPIcs, vol. 196. Schloss Dagstuhl, 2021, pp. 1:1–1:18.
[10] C. Chen, X. Xiang et al., “Xuantie-910: A commercial multi-core
12-stage pipeline out-of-order 64-bit high performance RISC-V
processor with vector extension: Industrial product,” in ISCA’20,
2020, pp. 52–64.
[11] AndesCore NX27V, Andes Technology, Hsinchu City, Taiwan, 2020.
[Online]. Available: http://www.andestech.com/en/products-
solutions/andescore-processors/riscv-nx27v
[12] M. Cavalcante et al., “Spatz: A compact vector processing unit
for high-performance and energy-efficient shared-L1 clusters,” in
ICCAD’22. ACM, Oct. 2022, pp. 1–9.
[13] SiFive Performance P270, SiFive Corp., San Mateo,
CA, USA, 2022, revision 21G3. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://sifive.cdn.prismic.io/sifive/859c28c0-8bd5-4fc4-9113-
a25a2a89bf9c P270+Data+Sheet.pdf
[14] SiFive, “P870 high-performance RISC-V processor,” in Hot Chips:
A Symposium on High-Perf. Chips. IEEE, Aug. 2023.
[15] C. Ramı́rez et al., “A RISC-V simulator and benchmark suite for
designing and evaluating vector architectures,” ACM Trans. Archit.
Code Optim., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1–30, 2020.
[16] M. Perotti et al., “A ‘new Ara’ for vector computing: an open source
highly efficient RISC-V V 1.0 vector processor design,” in ASAP’22.
IEEE, Jul. 2022.
[17] P. Vizcaino et al., “Short reasons for long vectors in HPC CPUs: a
study based on RISC-V,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06865, 2023.
[18] M. Johns and T. J. Kazmierski, “A minimal risc-v vector processor
for embedded systems,” in FDL’20, 2020, pp. 1–4.
[19] K. Patsidis et al., “RISC-V2: A scalable RISC-V vector processor,”
in ISCAS’20, 2020, pp. 1–5.
[20] C. Schmidt et al., “An eight-core 1.44-GHz RISC-V vector processor
in 16-nm FinFET,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 57,
no. 1, pp. 140–152, 2022.
[21] L. Bertaccini, L. Benini, and F. Conti, “To buffer, or not to buffer?
a case study on FFT accelerators for ultra-low-power multicore
clusters,” in ASAP’21, 2021, pp. 1–8.
[22] Cristóbal Ramı́rez Lazo, “RiVec benchmark suite.” [Online]. Avail-
able: https://github.com/RALC88/riscv-vectorized-benchmark-
suite
[23] F. Zaruba et al., “Snitch: A tiny pseudo dual-issue processor for
area and energy efficient execution of floating-point intensive
workloads,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 70, no. 11, pp.
1845–1860, 2020.
[24] Thang Tran, RISC-V vector extension webinar IV, Andes
Technology, Hsinchu City, Taiwan, 2021. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.andestech.com/wp-content/uploads/Andes-
RVV-Webinar-IV.pdf
[25] Toshiyuki Shimizu, POST-K Supercomputer Development, Fujitsu,
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.fujitsu.com/global/
imagesgig5/post-k-supercomputer-development.pdf
Matteo Perotti received his M.Sc. degree in Elec-
tronic Engineering from the Polytechnic University
of Turin, Italy, in 2019. He is currently pursu-
ing a Ph.D. degree at the Integrated Systems
Laboratory of ETH Zurich, Switzerland, under
the supervision of Prof. Luca Benini. Matteo’s
research interests include highly efficient comput-
ing architectures, vector processing, computation
with high dynamic-range data types, and the
RISC-V ecosystem in general.
Matheus Cavalcante received his M.Sc. degree
in Integrated Electronic Systems from the Greno-
ble Institute of Technology (Phelma) in 2018, and
his Ph.D. from ETH Zurich in 2023. During his
Ph.D. studies, Matheus worked with the Digital
Circuits and Systems Group under the super-
vision of Prof. Luca Benini. Matheus’ research
interests include vector processing, large-scale
high-performance computer architectures, and
emerging VLSI technologies.
Renzo Andri received the B.Sc., M.Sc. and
Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering and In-
formation Technology at ETH Zurich in 2013,
2015, and 2020, respectively. Since 2020 he is
working at the Huawei Research Center Zurich.
His research focuses lies on energy-efficient ma-
chine learning acceleration and processor design
down to full-custom IC design including hardware-
algorithm codesign. In 2019, he won the IEEE
TCAD Donald O. Pederson Award.
15
Lukas Cavigelli received the d Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering and information technology
from ETH Zurich in 2019. After a year as a Post-
doc at ETH Zurich, he has joined Huawei’s Zurich
Research Center in Spring 2020. His research
interests include deep learning, computer vision,
embedded systems, and low-power integrated
circuit design. He has received several best pa-
per awards including the IEEE TCAD Donald O.
Pederson award in 2019.
Luca Benini holds the chair of Digital Circuits
and Systems at ETH Zurich and is Full Professor
at the Università di Bologna. He received a Ph.D.
from Stanford University. Dr. Benini’s research in-
terests are in energy-efficient parallel computing
systems and ML hardware. He is a Fellow of the
ACM and a member of the Academia Europaea.
He received the IEEE Mac Van Valkenburg Award
in 2016, the ACM/IEEE A. Richard Newton Award
in 2020, and the IEEE E. McCluskey Award in
2023.
