1
Multi-Objective Hardware-Mapping
Co-Optimisation for Multi-DNN Workloads on
Chiplet-based Accelerators
Abhijit Das∗, Member, IEEE, Enrico Russo∗, Student Member, IEEE,
and Maurizio Palesi, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—The need to efficiently execute different Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) on the same computing platform, coupled with the
requirement for easy scalability, makes Multi-Chip Module (MCM)-based accelerators a preferred design choice. Such an accelerator
brings together heterogeneous sub-accelerators in the form of chiplets, interconnected by a Network-on-Package (NoP). This paper
addresses the challenge of selecting the most suitable sub-accelerators, configuring them, determining their optimal placement in the
NoP, and mapping the layers of a predetermined set of DNNs spatially and temporally. The objective is to minimise execution time and
energy consumption during parallel execution while also minimising the overall cost, specifically the silicon area, of the accelerator.
This paper presents MOHaM, a framework for multi-objective hardware-mapping co-optimisation for multi-DNN workloads on chiplet-
based accelerators. MOHaM exploits a multi-objective evolutionary algorithm that has been specialised for the given problem by
incorporating several customised genetic operators. MOHaM is evaluated against state-of-the-art Design Space Exploration (DSE)
frameworks on different multi-DNN workload scenarios. The solutions discovered by MOHaM are Pareto optimal compared to those by
the state-of-the-art. Specifically, MOHaM-generated accelerator designs can reduce latency by up to 96% and energy by up to 96.12%.
Index Terms—Deep Neural Network (DNN), Accelerator, Design Space Exploration (DSE), Hardware-Mapping Co-Optimisation.
✦
1 INTRODUCTION
DEEP NEURAL NETWORK (DNN) accelerators drive the
era of Domain-Specific Architectures (DSAs). From
edge [1] to the cloud [2], they are ubiquitous to enable per-
formance improvement for different applications. To meet
the ever-increasing computation demand from emerging
applications, bigger DNN accelerators are deployed in data
centers. Existing works have either proposed monolithic
chip-based designs like Google TPUv4 [2] or Multi-Chip
Module (MCM)-based designs like Simba [3]. The latter is
preferred as a scalable and adaptable design paradigm to
combine multiple accelerators (as chiplets) for building a big
multi-accelerator system. Table 1 presents the existing works
on multi-accelerator systems [3][2][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11].
Here, the second column, Hetero-Core, indicates the avail-
ability of heterogeneous core or chiplet integration.
A primary enabler of scalability in accelerators is the
support for multi-DNN workloads, where different DNNs
are executed together. This becomes a fundamental aspect
in multi-accelerator systems as they could house heteroge-
neous accelerators supporting diverse DNNs. Naturally, the
third column, Mul-DNN, in Table 1 indicates that most ex-
isting works support multi-DNN workloads in some form.
Two of the most important factors deciding a DNN ac-
celerator’s performance are its hardware configuration and
• A. Das is with the Department of Computer Architecture, Universitat
Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona 08034, Spain.
E-mail: abhijit.das@upc.edu
• E. Russo and M. Palesi are with the Department of Electrical, Electronics
and Computer Engineering, University of Catania, Catania 95124, Italy.
E-mail: enrico.russo@phd.unict.it; maurizio.palesi@unict.it
• A. Das and E. Russo are co-first authors and contributed equally.
Manuscript received Month 00, 0000; revised Month 00, 0000.
Table 1: Comparison of multi-accelerator systems based
on the availability of heterogeneous cores (Hetero-Core),
multi-DNN workloads (Mul-DNN), hardware-mapping co-
optimisation (HW-MP) and multi-objective exploration
(Mul-Obj). A (−) indicates unavailability of information.
Work Hetero-Core Mul-DNN HW-MP Mul-Obj
Simba [3] é é é é
TPUv4 [2] é − é é
CS-2 [4] é é é é
AI-MT [5] Ë Ë é é
PREMA [6] Ë Ë é é
Planaria [7] é Ë Ë é
Herald [8] Ë Ë Ë é
VELTAIR [9] é Ë é é
MAGMA [10] Ë Ë é é
H3M [11] é Ë Ë é
MOHaM Ë Ë Ë Ë
mapping strategy. Their design spaces are extremely large
and hence are often optimised independently [12][13][14].
With multiple heterogeneous accelerators, these design
spaces are only becoming larger in multi-accelerator sys-
tems. For example, MAGMA [10] reported the design space
of mapping alone to be of size O(1e81). However, hardware
and mapping are interdependent and, if not optimised
together, may lead to sub-par performance when workload
changes [15]. Furthermore, even if a multi-accelerator sys-
tem is designed for known workloads, there is extreme
heterogeneity in layer shapes and operations [8]. Hence,
hardware-mapping co-optimisation is critical to tackle the
efficiency challenges in multi-accelerator systems and im-
prove their performance. The fourth column, HW-MP, in
Table 1 shows the availability of hardware-mapping co-
optimisation in existing multi-accelerator systems.
© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes,creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse
of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TC.2024.3386067
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 2
Conv_0 Conv_23 Fc_121
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalised
EDP
Simba Eyeriss ShiDianNao
(a)
Hardware Only Mapping Only Hardware-Mapping
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalised
EDP
(b)
6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0
Energy [mJ]
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Latency
[cycles]
1e7
Multi-Objective Optimisation EDP Single-Objective Optimisation
Area [mm²] 10 20 30 40 50
(c)
Figure 1: Need for heterogeneity, co-optimisation and multi-objective exploration.
Designing an accelerator often involves multiple objec-
tives, like latency (delay), throughput, energy, area, temper-
ature, Total Cost of Ownership (TCO), carbon footprint, etc.
A convenient way to explore is the aggregation of multi-
ple objectives into one (mono-objective), say, Energy-Delay-
Product (EDP). However, a chosen group of objectives might
be conflicting with one another; in which case, aggregation
does not help. With multi-accelerator systems bringing het-
erogeneous accelerators together, penalties for aggregation
will be higher. Hence, a multi-objective exploration is nec-
essary for identifying multiple solutions to select the most
suitable one according to the requirement. Unfortunately,
the last column, Mul-Obj, in Table 1 shows that none of the
existing systems has explored the multi-objective space.
Contribution: An ideal multi-accelerator system will
have all the columns ticked (Ë) in Table 1, i.e., it will
have Hetero-Core for adaptability, Mul-DNN for scalability,
HW-MP for performance, and Mul-Obj for solution variety.
However, state-of-the-art falls short in one or more of these
requirements due to the unavailability of an orthogonal
Design Space Exploration (DSE) framework. This work
proposes such a framework for Multi-Objective Hardware-
Mapping co-optimisation for multi-DNN workloads on
chiplet-based accelerators (MOHaM)1
. A multi-accelerator
system designed using MOHaM will tick all the columns in
Table 1. The proposed framework has the following features:
1) Given a multi-DNN workload and a library of het-
erogeneous accelerator templates, MOHaM outputs
a Pareto set of multi-accelerator system designs and
their associated schedules for the optimal trade-off
between objectives. It is to be used at design-time.
2) MOHaM exploits the NSGA-II [16] multi-objective
Genetic Algorithm (GA) and leverages the
Timeloop [17] + Accelergy [18] cost model for DSE.
3) MOHaM is for designing multi-accelerator systems
where the workload can be known or guessed
apriori. The workload, accelerator templates and
objectives can be set as per the design requirement.
This work makes the following novel contributions:
1) It frames the need for adaptability, scalability, per-
formance and solution variety in multi-accelerator
systems into an optimisation problem. It devel-
ops multiple modules to present MOHaM, the
first open-source infrastructure for complete DSE of
multi-accelerator systems with known workloads.
1. https://github.com/Haimrich/moham
2) It designs several custom GA operators and pro-
poses an optimisation algorithm to enable strategic
exploration of the huge design space. This increases
the sampling efficiency and makes MOHaM orders
of magnitude faster than the exhaustive search.
3) For the evaluated state-of-the-art, MOHaM-
generated system designs are capable of reducing
latency by 18.40%, 13% and 96% and energy by
36.87%, 96.12% and 93.76% compared to CoSA [12],
DiGamma [19] and Herald [8], respectively.
2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
2.1 Chiplet-based Accelerators
To ensure scalability, Simba [3] proposed a Multi-Chip-
Module (MCM) based multi-accelerator system, where each
chiplet is a DNN accelerator (called sub-accelerator in the
bigger context) connected by a Network-on-Package (NoP).
Each Sub-Accelerator (SA) has an array of Processing El-
ements (PEs) and a shared Global Buffer (GB) [20]. Each
PE houses one or more Multiply-Accumulate (MAC) units
to compute partial sums and a Local Buffer (LB) to store
them. GB collects weights and activations from memory
(HBM/DRAM) through the NoP and distributes them to
the LBs through the Network-on-Chip (NoC). Similarly,
outputs are written from LB to GB and then to mem-
ory through NoC and NoP, respectively. However, unlike
Simba, which employs homogeneous chiplets, the proposed
MOHaM framework supports heterogeneous chiplets to
ensure adaptability with diverse DNNs. Existing literature
has many promising accelerators that could be used as SA
chiplets in MOHaM for DSE [21][3][22][23][24][25][26].
2.2 Multi-DNN Workloads
To maintain competitive performance, emerging applica-
tions started employing DNNs for performing tasks like
image classification, image segmentation, object detection,
etc. For example, an AR/VR application could employ
diverse DNNs together for different tasks, thus forming a
multi-DNN workload. This diversity of DNNs leads to ex-
treme heterogeneity in layer shapes and operations. Hence,
different layers of DNNs could have specific dataflow pref-
erences. However, most of the SAs are usually optimised
for some specific layers with a fixed dataflow [8]. Figure 1a
shows how the normalised EDP varies when the same
DNN is run on different SAs. Here, three dominant layers,
Convolution CONV 0 and CONV 33, and Fully Connected
FC 121 from the ResNet50 DNN model [27] are consid-
ered. These layers are individually run on row-stationary
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 3
(Eyeriss [20]), weight-stationary (Simba [3]) and output-
stationary (ShiDianNao [26]) SAs. While similar observa-
tions are also available in the literature [8][28][17][15], but
the objective here is to advocate for flexible accelerators.
MOHaM offers dataflow flexibility with heterogeneous SAs.
2.3 Hardware-Mapping Co-Optimisation
A typical hardware-mapping co-optimisation framework
takes as input, a target DNN, an optimisation objective (e.g.
latency) and the resource constraints (e.g. area). It returns as
output a hardware configuration with the optimal instances
of resources and an optimal mapping strategy to run the
DNN on the accelerator. This co-optimisation can be used
at design-time. Figure 1b shows how the normalised EDP
varies when the same ResNet50 DNN model [27] is run
with hardware-only, mapping-only and hardware-mapping
co-optimisation. Hardware-only optimisation has lower en-
ergy due to optimal hardware resources but higher latency
(delay) due to fixed mapping. On the contrary, mapping-
only optimisation has a lower delay due to optimal mapping
strategy but higher energy due to fixed hardware. Co-
optimisation gets the best of hardware and mapping, and
has the lowest normalised EDP. However, the search space
is extremely large as it is the cross-product of hardware and
mapping. For example, DiGamma [19] recently reported a
design space as large as O(1036
), and that is only for a
single accelerator. MOHaM offers a DSE which is orders of
magnitude faster than the standard exhaustive search.
2.4 Multi-Objective Exploration
The convenient way of aggregating multiple optimisation
objectives into one (mono-objective) invites penalty when
objectives conflict. For example, due to the chosen memory
hierarchy, if the system bandwidth is insufficient to feed
enough data into the compute (MAC) units, they remain
underutilised. In such a scenario, two mapping strategies
may output identical latency but varying hardware resource
utilisation, hence different energy and area. Similarly, it
is possible to either access an enlarged on-chip buffer or
the next-level buffer (memory) within the same energy
budget. In such a scenario, even two hardware-mapping
co-optimisations may output identical energy but different
latency and area. These scenarios can be expressed as a set
of non-dominating design points (multi-objective). Figure 1c
shows the DSE when the same ResNet50 DNN model [27]
is run for mono-objective exploration with EDP and multi-
objective exploration with latency, energy and area. While
mono-objective offers an aggregated solution, the Pareto set
of distinct multi-objective solutions allows simultaneously
exploring accelerator designs with varying requirements.
MOHaM offers multi-objective exploration-enabled DSE.
3 PROBLEM FORMULATION
Given a set of DNNs to be executed in parallel, and a
library of heterogeneous accelerator templates, MOHaM
aims to identify a Pareto set of system configurations with
associated scheduling for the optimal trade-off between la-
tency, energy and area2
. Figure 2 shows MOHaM’s internal
organisation with inputs and output and are explained here.
2. Only for the sake of evaluation, latency, energy and area objec-
tives are chosen in the problem formulation. The DNNs, accelerator
templates and objectives can be modified in MOHaM for specific DSE.
3.1 MOHaM Inputs
The set of DNNs to be executed in parallel is called an
Application Model, AM. While layers of different DNNs can
be executed in any order, layers within the same DNN must
be executed as per their dependencies. Figure 2(a) shows an
AM with three DNNs, where arrows indicate the order of
layer dependencies. For example, in DNN0, layer L0.3 must
be executed only after the completion of L0.1 and L0.2.
The library of heterogeneous accelerator templates is a
collection of parameterised, reconfigurable DNN accelera-
tors used as chiplets. Each is referred to as a Sub-Accelerator
Template, SAT, but when its parameters are set, it becomes
a Sub-Accelerator Instance, SAI. Figure 2(b) shows a library
of three SATs. Eyeriss [20], Simba [3] and ShiDianNao [26]
SATs are used to evaluate MOHaM (refer Table 4). For
example, in the Eyeriss SAT, if the number of PEs, shared
buffer size and PE scratchpad size are set to something
within their maximum bound, it becomes an Eyeriss SAI.
3.2 MOHaM Output
A Pareto set of solutions is identified with optimised objec-
tives, latency, energy and area. Figure 2(c) shows a Pareto
set, where each solution is a pair of a Multi-Accelerator
System, MAS, and its associated Schedule, S. A MAS defines
the hardware configuration, like the set of SAIs, Memory
Interfaces, MIs, and their placement in the NoP. Figure 2(d)
shows a MAS with four heterogenous SAIs and an external
memory (e.g., DRAM) interconnected by a 2D Mesh NoP.
A schedule S defines the mapping strategy, like where
each layer of every DNN is mapped in the chiplets, and the
order in which they will be executed. Figure 2(e) shows a
schedule, where multiple layers are mapped onto the same
chiplet (or SAI). For example, L2.0 and L1.1 are mapped onto
SAI0.0. In such a case, they are executed sequentially. Each
layer gets the mapping information in a loop-nest form.
3.3 MOHaM Working
MOHaM takes each layer of the AM and maps them to each
of the SATs from the input library. It identifies the Pareto
set of mappings for each layer across all the SATs with
respect to the chosen optimisation objectives. MOHaM then
employs a custom GA to conduct multi-objective optimisa-
tion with respect to the distinct objectives, latency, energy,
and area. This optimisation fine-tunes the (a) selection of
Pareto mappings for each layer identified initially, (b) layer
scheduling strategies, (c) instantiations of SATs, (d) alloca-
tion of hardware resources to each SAI, (e) assignment of
layers to SAIs, and (f) placement of SAI tiles in the NoP.
3.4 MOHaM Problem Formulation
Based on the above information, the problem can be formu-
lated as follows: MOHaM aims to minimise latency, energy,
and area while ensuring they remain distinct from one
another, thereby adopting a multi-objective optimisation.
min Latency(AM , MAS, S)
min Energy(AM , MAS, S)
min Area(MAS)
While latency and energy are influenced by factors such
as the application model, the configuration of the multi-
accelerator system, and the schedule, area is solely deter-
mined by the configuration of the multi-accelerator system.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 4
L 0.0
L 0.1
L 0.2
L 0.3
L 2.2
L 2.3
L 2.4
L 1.0 L 1.1 L 1.2 L 1.3
L 2.0 L 2.1
a) Application Model (AM)
DNN 0
DNN 1
DNN 2
SAT 0 SAT 1 SAT 2
b) Sub-Accelerator Template (SAT) Library
MOHaM
Energy
Buffer Sizes
Number of Spatial Instances
Layer mappings on
single accelerator Individuals encoding
Multi-Accelerator Sol.
Pareto-efficient Configuration
c) Approx.
Pareto
Set
Latency
Global Buffer
PE PE PE
PE PE PE
Local Buffer
MAC
  MAC
 
A
r
e
a
SAI 1.0
SAI 2.0
SAI 2.1
SAI 0.0
d) Heterogenous Multi-Accelerator System
DRAM
MAS
SAI 2.0
SAI 0.0
L1.0 (M57)
L2.0 (M5)
Time
Space
e) Global Scheduling
SAI 2.1
SAI 1.0
L0.0 (M2)
L0.2 (M3)
L2.1 (M1)
L1.1 (M14)
L2.2 (M23)
L2.3 (M3)
L0.3 (M12)
S
Timeloop+Accelergy
MEDEA
(Layer, SAI specs, mapping)
Energy
Latency
Area
Cost Model
×
MFl,f
MG
Population
Scheduling Crossover
Mapping Crossover
Sub-Accelerator Crossover
Fast
Non-Dominated
Sorting
Offspring
Population
Survival
Scheduling Mutation
Sub-Acc. Splitting Mutation
Sub-Acc. Merging Mutation
Mapping Mutation
Position Mutation
Template Mutation
Layer Assignment Mutaiton
Custom
Genetic
Operators
L0.1 (M41)
Layer Mapping M41 on SAT 2
// Level 3 - DRAM
for n = [0,1):
for q3 = [0,8):
for p3 = [0,56):
// Level 2 - Global Buffer
for k1 = [0,16):
for q2 = [0,2):
spatial-for-X p2x = [0,4):
spatial-for-Y k2y = [0,4):
// Level 1 - Local Buffer
for r1 = [0,3):
for s1 = [0,3):
for q1 = [0,14):
spatial-for-X c1 = [0,3):
Figure 2: Inputs, output and internal organisation of the proposed MOHaM framework.
Schedule S provides a set of pairs (L, SAI), indicating
which layer is mapped to which SA instance along with the
order of their execution. A layer can not be mapped into
more than one SA instance. It can be represented by:
∀ t ∄ (Li, SAIi) ∈ S ∧ (Lj, SAIj) ∈ S
such that
Li = Lj ∧ SAIi ̸= SAIj
3.5 MOHaM Search Space
Let Num. Layers and Num. DNNs be the number of lay-
ers and DNNs, respectively, that constitute an application
model. Let Max. Chiplets be the maximum chiplets that
can be used in a multi-accelerator system. Let Num. SATs
be the number of templates available in the SAT library.
Let Num. Params and Num. Values be the number of free
parameters and the number of values each parameter can
take, respectively, of a SAT. For the sake of simplification, it
is assumed that Num. Params and Num. Values are the same
for all the SATs3
. A lower bound for the search space size is:
Search Space Size ≥ 7! ×
7
Y
d=1
m|Fd|
!Num. Layers
(1)
×
Max. Chiplets
X
Chiplets=1

Num. SATsChiplets
(2)
× Num. V aluesNum. P arams × Chiplets
(3)
× Chiplets! (4)
× ChipletsNum. Layers

(5)
× Num. DNNs! (6)
Assuming fixed-dataflow SATs, term (1) is the mapping
space size calculated by multiplying the number of loop per-
mutations in DRAM (assuming these are not fixed) by the
number of possible factorisation of each workload dimen-
sion. To calculate the latter, loop tiling can be thought of as
3. It compacts term (3) and avoids its expansion for each SAT.
the task of assigning a tiling level to each prime factor of the
workload dimensions involved. Without spatial unrolling,
the number of tiling levels coincides with the number of
memory levels; otherwise, it will be greater. In term (1), 7 is
the number of tensor dimensions in a convolutional layer, m
is the number of tiling levels (greater or equal to the number
of levels in the SAT memory hierarchy), and Fd is the set of
the prime factors of the dth
workload dimension.
For a multi-accelerator system consisting of Chiplets
chiplets, term (2) represents the number of possible com-
binations in which SATs can be assigned to the chiplets.
Term (3) represents the number of possible combinations
of the various instances of SATs that can be assigned to the
chiplets. As mentioned above, here it is assumed that Num.
Params and Num. Values are uniform across all the SATs.
However, in the generic case, each parameter p will vary
within a specific set with a cardinality of Num. Values(p).
Hence, for the generic case, term (3) will be modified as:


Num. P arams
Y
p=1
Num. V alues(p)


Chiplets
(7)
Term (4) represents the possible combinations of assigning
a chiplet to an NoP tile. Term (5) represents the number
of possible combinations for assigning a layer to a chiplet.
Finally, term (6) gives a lower bound on the possible sched-
ules considering the combinations of execution order at the
DNN granularity rather than the layer granularity.
The simulation configuration used to evaluate MOHaM
in Section 5 has Num. Layers as 200 (average), Num. DNNs
as 4, Max. Chiplets as 8, Num. SATs as 3, Num. Params as
4 (average), and Num. Values as 4096 (average). Hence, the
search space size is in the order of 104318
. To get an idea of
how large this is, consider that the number of particles in
the observable universe is estimated to be around 1080
.
4 THE MOHAM FRAMEWORK
To search such an enormous space, the proposed MOHaM
framework adopts a two-step approach, layer mapping and
global scheduling. Algorithm 1 presents a high-level flow of
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 5
Algorithm 1: MOHaM high-level flow
1 Procedure LayerMapper(AM, SSAT)
2 MG← {}
3 for layer in UniqueLayers(AM) do
4 ML← {}
5 for arch in SSAT do
6 MF← RunMEDEA(layer, arch)
7 ML.Add(MF)
8 MG.Add(ML)
9 return MG
10 Procedure GlobalScheduler(AM, SSAT, MG)
11 PP← InitialPopulation()
12 for g ← 1 to G do
13 // G = number of generations
14 OP← ApplyCrossoverOperators(PP)
15 OP.ApplyMutationOperators(OP)
16 OP.Evaluate()
17 MP← FastNonDominatedSort(PP, OP)
18 OP← Survival(MP)
19 return PP.GetParetoIndividuals()
20 Procedure MOHaM(AM, SSAT)
21 MG← LayerMapper(AM, SSAT)
22 ST← GlobalScheduler(AM, SSAT, MG)
23 return ST // Pareto set of schedules
Table 2: Acronyms, abbreviations and key terms
AM Application Model; a set of independent DNNs.
SAT Sub-Accelerator Template; a parameterised and reconfig-
urable DNN accelerator with a fixed memory hierarchy.
SAI Sub-Accelerator Instance of an SAT with fixed parameters.
MI Memory Interface; connects memory banks with SAIs.
NoP Network-on-Package; interconnect SAIs and MIs.
MAS Multi-Accelerator System; a set of SAIs with memory.
S Schedule; spatial and temporal allocation of each layer of
every DNN of an AM on the SAIs of a MAS.
Ml,f,i ith Pareto mapping for a layer l in an SAT f.
MFl,f Pareto set of mappings for a layer l in an SAT f.
MLl Pareto set of mappings for a layer l in all the SATs.
MG Pareto set of mappings for all the layers in all the SATs.
NSGA-II Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm [16].
Gene A tuple of encoded values for a layer or an SAI.
Genome An array of genes that represent all the information about
a layer or an SAI, like mapping, execution order, etc.
ChromosomeA concatenation of genomes of all the layers and SAIs.
Individual A chromosome with valid mapping, SAI and execution
order of the layers, and SAT and NoP tiles for the SAIs.
Population A set of individuals evolving through GA generations.
Pareto
Efficiency
An individual is Pareto-efficient if no one else in the
population is better for all the objectives at the same time.
Topological
Sort
A linear ordering of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)
where a node appears before all the nodes it points to.
MOHaM, and the following sections describe its working.
Table 2 presents the acronyms, abbreviations and key terms.
4.1 Layer Mapper
In this step, each layer of the AM is mapped onto each
of the SATs from the input library. At all times, a layer is
mapped onto any single instance of an SAT and can not
be split across multiple SAT instances. Two layers, li and lj
can be instances of the same workload, i.e., have the same
problem dimensions. Hence, to reduce the layer mapping
search space, MOHaM only maps the unique layers to SATs.
Let Ml,f,i be the ith
Pareto mapping for a layer l of the
AM in a SAT f from the input library. Ml,f,i is a choice of
1 2 0 2 0 5 0 2 4 1 1 12 0 3 2 1
Hardware Genome Software Genome
Application Model
Pareto Mappings
 Chromosome
SA Template ID
Gene (SA) Gene (Layer)
SA Instance ID Mapping ID
SA Instance ID
Layer ID
SAI2.1 SAI2.0
SA0
SA1
L0 (M5) L1 (M12)
L2 (M4) L3 (M2)
Time
Space
MF0,2
L 0
L 1
L 2
L 3
Sub-Accelerator Template Library
SAT0 SAT1 SAT2
4
3
2
1
0
Heterogenous Accelerator Scheduling
Decoding
Figure 3: MOHaM global scheduler chromosome structure.
a specific tiling, loop ordering, parallelism and clustering in
f. Let MFl,f be the Pareto set of mappings with respect to
the objectives for l in f. MFl,f can be represented by:
MFl,f = { Ml,f,i | i = 0, . . . , (ml,f − 1) } (8)
where, ml,f is the total number of Pareto mappings. Now,
let MLl be the Pareto set of mappings for l in all the SATs
of the input library. MLl can be represented by:
MLl = { MFl,f | f = 0, . . . , (F − 1) } (9)
where, F is the total number of SATs in the input library.
Finally, let MG be the Pareto set of mappings for all the
layers of AM in all the SATs. MG can be represented by:
MG = { MLl | l = 0, . . . , (L − 1) } (10)
where, L is the total number of layers in the AM. MOHaM
obtains the Pareto set of mappings in equation (8) to (10)
by leveraging MEDEA [29] (refer line 6 in Algorithm 1). For
each layer of the AM, MEDEA searches for the Pareto set
of mappings onto an SAT instance. The Pareto set is for the
chosen optimisation objectives, latency, energy and area.
4.2 Global Scheduler
In this step, the Pareto set of mappings found for each layer
in the previous step (Section 4.1) is used to search the global
scheduling. It returns a Pareto set of (MAS, S) pair with
minimum latency, energy and area. This scheduler exploits
one of the most widely accepted multi-objective GA, NGSA-
II [16]. It has five major phases, sampling, selection, crossover,
mutation and survival. While the original selection and sur-
vival phases are used, several custom genetic operators are
designed for problem-specific crossover and mutation to
increase sampling efficiency and decrease search time.
4.2.1 Chromosome Encoding
A fundamental step in employing a GA is to define an
encoding for the individuals in the population. MOHaM
requires this encoding to represent, (a) mapping strategy
of each layer, (b) SAI of each layer, (c) execution sequence
of layers in the AM, (d) SA template of each SAI, and (e)
NoP tile of each SAI. A two-part chromosome used by the
scheduler is shown in Figure 3 and is described here:
• Hardware Genome: It encodes the instances of the
SATs. It is an array of genes, where each gene denotes
an SAI. Each gene is a tuple ⟨SAI, SAT⟩ where SAI
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 6
③ Random
between and
Parent A
Parent A Gene Parent B Gene
Mutated Gene A Mutated Gene B
Invariant Gene
Result of Mapping Transform
Hardware Gene
Software Gene
a) Scheduling Crossover
0 2 3 1 4
0 1 4 2 3
0 2 1 4 3
0 1 2 3 4
Crossover Point
Parent B
Offspring A
Offspring B
Crossover Point
b) Mapping Crossover
Legend
Donor SAT
==
Receiver SAT
if
Donor SAT
!=
Receiver SAT
Receiver SAT
Donor SAT
1 5 3
10
17 4 9
3
17 4 12
10
1 5 8
3
Mapping
Transform
Parent A
Parent B
Offspring A
Offspring B
Layer
d) Scheduling Mutation
0 3 1 2 4
0 1 3 2 4
① Random li
li
② Find first successor
lj
lj
④ Swap if legal
lk
AM
Original
Topological Sorting L 0 L 1
L 2
L 3
L 4
Original
Mutated
g) Mapping Mutation
③ Choose another
random mapping
① Choose random layer
9 12 0
0 2
MF9,2 44
12
6
9
0
9 44 0
0 2
② Mapp. Pareto Set
for layer 9 and templ. 2
Original
Mutated
e) SA Splitting Mutation
Original
0 1
Mutated
0 1 1 1
f) SA Merging Mutation
Mutated
0 1
Original
0 1 1 3
c) SA Crossover
① Choose random SAI ID
0 0
4 2 1
7 1 1
5
0 1
1 2 1
2 1 0
9
Parent A
Parent B
0 2
0 3
1 2
1 1
0 1
3 2 1
8 1 1
11
0 2 1 1
Offspring A
0 1
1 2 1
2 1 1
9
0 3 1 2
Offspring B
② Copy genes of layers assigned to the selected SAI
③ Transform mappings if templates are different
④ Remove unused SAIs
h) Position Mutation
0 4
1 2
1 2
0 4
2 5
2 5
3 2
3 2
Original
Mutated
SAI4.0 SAI2.1
SAI5.2 SAI2.3
MI MI
Encodes for
Encodes for
SAI4.0
SAI2.1
SAI5.2 SA2.3
MI MI
Target
j) Layer Assignment Mutation
Original
0 1 1 2
Mutated
0 1 1 2
i) Template Mutation
Original
0 1 1 0
Mutated
0 2 1 0
SAT0
SAT1
SAT2
SAT Library
Target
if
Swap
Order
NEW
Figure 4: MOHaM-specific genetic operators
is the SA instance and SAT is the template identifier.
The order of the genes represents the position of the
SAI hosting tile in the NoP. The number of genes is
equal to the number of SAIs and varies between 1
and maximum NoP tiles across chromosomes.
• Software Genome: It encodes the layers of the AM. It
is an array of genes, where each gene denotes a layer.
Each gene is a tuple ⟨LID, MID, SAI⟩ where LID is
the layer identifier, MID is the mapping identifier,
and SAI is the SA instance the layer will be executed.
The order of the genes is a topological sorting of the
layers using Kahn’s algorithm [30] and represents the
temporal sequence in which the layers will be exe-
cuted. The number of genes is equal to the number
of layers in the AM and is fixed for chromosomes.
4.2.2 Custom Genetic Operators
The standard crossover swaps parental genes at a pivot
point to generate offspring, while standard mutation ran-
domly changes some genes of the offspring to introduce
variation. However, directly applying these operators to
MOHaM will not work since offspring chromosomes must
adhere to specific constraints to be valid individuals. Each
MOHaM chromosome is a tuple ⟨genomehw
, genomesw
⟩
where genomehw
can be represented by:
genomehw
= { ghw
i = ⟨SAI, SAT⟩ | i = 1, . . . , Chiplets }
Whereas genomesw
can be represented by:
genomesw
= { gsw
j = ⟨LID, MID, SAI⟩ | j = 1, . . . , Layers }
The constraints for valid individuals are specified as follows:
C1 In the hardware genome, the SAT of a gene must
refer to one of the templates from the input library.
ghw
i = ⟨•, SATi⟩ | SATi ∈ SAT Input Library
C2 In the hardware genome, each SAI must be referred
to by at least one gene from the software genome.
ghw
i = ⟨SAIi, •⟩ | ∃j with gsw
j = ⟨•, •, SAIi⟩
C3 In the software genome, the MID of a layer l must
refer to one of the mappings from MFl,f , where f is
the template of the SAI on which l will be executed.
gsw
j = ⟨•, MIDj, SAIj⟩ | MIDj ∈ MFlj ,fj
where fj = SA Template(SAIj)
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 7
C4 In the software genome, the SAI of a layer must refer
to one of the encoded genes in the hardware genome.
gsw
j = ⟨•, •, SAIj⟩ | ∃i with ghw
i = ⟨SAIj, •⟩
C5 In the software genome, the order of the genes must
be a valid topological sorting that respects the depen-
dencies between layers of the DNNs from the AM.
∀j, k = 1, . . . , Layers | j < k
gsw
j = ⟨LIDj, •, •⟩, gsw
k = ⟨LIDk, •, •⟩
⇒ (LIDk, LIDj) /
∈ D
where D is the set of dependencies between layers.
Therefore, the choice of crossover and mutation oper-
ators significantly impacts the performance of a GA, and
it is often necessary to adapt them to the specific problem
at hand. While there is no systematic way, using domain-
specific knowledge of the problem is a common practice
for customising crossover and mutation. Hence, a set of
custom crossover and mutation operators are designed by
considering the problem-specific constraints to (a) explore
the search space strategically, and (b) increase the sampling
efficiency. They are shown in Figure 4 and described here:
(a) Scheduling Crossover: It combines the topological sort-
ing of the parent chromosomes, as shown in Figure 4(a).
It generates offspring by taking the first part of one of
the parents, i.e., all the genes before the crossover point,
and appending all the unique genes from the other parent.
Existing literature [31] has proof that by proceeding this
way, the offspring will also have valid topological sorting.
(b) Mapping Crossover: It combines the mappings of the
parent chromosomes, as shown in Figure 4(b). It generates
offspring by taking layer mappings from the first part of
one of the parents, i.e., all the genes before the crossover
point, and the remaining mappings from the other parent.
However, a new mapping might be invalid if it is for an SA
template different from that of the SAI on which the layer
will be executed. In such a case, a compensation mechanism
called Mapping Transform finds the most similar one among
all the possible mappings for the layer in that SAI.
(c) SA Crossover: It swaps a random SAI at ith
position,
saii, between the parent chromosomes, as shown in Fig-
ure 4(c). If both parents A and B have an SAI at the ith
position, they are swapped and two offspring are generated.
In such a case, if saii of A and saii of B are of different
SA templates, all the mappings from both of their layers
undergo Mapping Transform. Whereas, if only one parent has
an SAI at the ith
position, it is added to the other parent with
all its assigned layers and only one offspring is generated.
(d) Scheduling Mutation: It mutates the topological sorting
of a chromosome, as shown in Figure 4(d). Let li be a
random gene (layer) from the software genome. Let lj be
the nearest layer in the traversal that is dependent on li.
Let lk be a random layer between li and lj. If all the layers
on which lk has a dependency lie before li in the traversal,
their position can be swapped. Similar to 4(a), the mutated
chromosome will also have a valid topological sorting [31].
(e) SA Splitting Mutation: It reduces the load in a random
SAI at ith
position, saii, to mutate a chromosome, as shown
in Figure 4(e). A new saij of the same SA template is
appended to the hardware genome. Thereafter, half of the
layers currently assigned to saii are randomly chosen and
assigned to saij. The goal is to increase parallelisation.
(f) SA Merging Mutation: It increases the load in a random
SAI at ith
position, saii, to mutate a chromosome, as shown
in Figure 4(f). Another existing SAI at jth
position, saij, is
randomly chosen and all its layers are assigned to saii. If
saij is of a different SA template than saii, all the mappings
of the imported layers undergo Mapping Transform. The goal
is to reduce chip area with reduced SAIs.
(g) Mapping Mutation: It modifies the MID of a random
layer l to mutate a chromosome, as shown in Figure 4(g). All
the possible mappings of l are in the MFl,f Pareto set, where
f is the template of the SAI on which l will be executed. One
of those possible mappings is assigned to l for mutation.
(h) SA Position Mutation: It swaps the position of two SAI
hosting tiles in the 2D Mesh NoP, as shown in Figure 4(h).
The goal is to find a configuration where the system band-
width is distributed among the SAIs and MIs in a way that
avoids communication bottlenecks and reduces latency.
(i) SA Template Mutation: It modifies the SA template
of a random SAI to mutate a chromosome, as shown in
Figure 4(i). All the mappings from different layers to be
executed on the mutated SAI undergo Mapping Transform.
(j) Layer Assignment Mutation: It modifies the SAI of a
random layer l to mutate a chromosome, as shown in Fig-
ure 4(j). If the modified SAI is of a different SA template, the
corresponding mapping for l undergoes Mapping Transform.
These operators are input agnostic, i.e., MOHaM can be
used for any DNN as an AM, with any accelerator as an SAT,
without modifying or adding any custom GA operator.
4.3 Objectives Evaluation
Three objective metrics are evaluated for each individual:
(a) latency, which is the makespan of the workload, (b)
energy, which is the total energy consumption to execute
the workload, and (c) area, which is the real estate of the
hardware for the workload. They depend on the system
configuration and the schedule. For example, increasing
the number of SAIs decreases latency but increases area.
Similarly, the mapping strategy for each layer of the AM,
and the SATs affect all three objectives. MOHaM translates
the chromosome encoding into objective metrics using the
Timeloop [17] + Accelergy [18] cost model (refer Figure 2).
The translation begins from the hardware genome. Each
of its genes is converted into an SAI of the appropriate SAT.
At this point, parameter values of the SAIs are unknown.
Then software genomes are examined to identify which
mappings are used for each gene (layer). All the free param-
eters, including the number of PEs, size of buffers, etc., are
set to the maximum required by the mappings for all the lay-
ers assigned to an SAI. For example, Figure 2(e) shows that
L2.0 and L1.1 are assigned to SAI0.0. If they require 64 and
128 PEs and 64 KiB and 32 KiB shared buffers, respectively,
SAI0.0 will be assigned 128 PEs and 64 KiB shared buffer.
Each SAI executes its assigned layers, and the total area is
estimated. This over-provision is automatically handled, as
MOHaM finally identifies individuals with minimum area.
As each mapping has its corresponding energy con-
sumption, summing them for all the layers could provide
the total energy consumption. However, energy for reads
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 8
and writes in the buffers depends on their sizes. Hence,
energy for each mapping must be estimated based on the
updated values of the free parameters in the SAIs.
Latency is estimated using the topological sorting en-
coded in the software genome. Each of its genes (layers) is
read sequentially and mapped on the assigned SAIs. This
traversal guarantees that a layer’s dependencies are already
scheduled before its turn comes. Each layer has a start and
end time, and the total latency is estimated based on the
latest end time among all the layers. However, this is true
only when no communication or memory bottlenecks exist.
4.3.1 Communication Modeling
As shown in Figure 2(d), MOHaM assumes that a 2D Mesh
NoP interconnects the SAIs and memory banks. The SAIs
communicate with the memory banks through the MIs. The
NoP is implemented via on-package links in a passive sili-
con interposer. It employs efficient intra-package signalling
circuits using Ground-Reference Signaling (GRS) technol-
ogy. Specifically, each chiplet has eight chiplet-to-chiplet
GRS transceivers; four transmitters and four receivers. A
transceiver has four data lanes, each providing 4 GB/s, thus
a total peak chiplet bandwidth of 4 * 4 GB/s = 16 GB/s and
energy of 0.82 pJ/bit [3]. The NoP employs the XY routing
algorithm. There is no inter-chiplet communication and the
SAIs only communicate with the MIs. While the positions
of the MIs are configurable, MOHaM assumed one at each
corner of the 2D Mesh NoP for the evaluation in Section 5.
SAIs reads and writes in their nearest MIs. Some CPU
processing happens between layer execution (e.g. tensor
reordering), and the output is stored in the nearest memory
bank of the SAI executing the next layer. Depending on their
position in the NoP, multiple SAIs could be assigned the
same MI, thus competing for the shared link. Let 16 SAIs be
arranged in a 4×4 2D Mesh NoP with 4 MIs, one at each
corner. Here, 4 SAIs will be sharing 1 MI and the NoP link
connecting that MI will be the bottleneck link. So, either
the shared MI bandwidth (BWMI) or the bottleneck link
bandwidth (BWBL) will be the reason for the congestion.
Each layer has a certain read and write bandwidth
requirement when executed on its assigned SAI. If a time
segment has parallel execution of layers and the combined
bandwidth requirement of the layers executed on the SAIs
sharing the same MI exceeds either the BWMI or the
BWBL, there will be stalls. Let the time segment be n cycles
and the combined bandwidth requirement be BWreq. The
stalled time segment of m cycles can be calculated by:
m = n ×
BWreq
min(BWMI, BWBL)
m > n signifies a delay in the execution of certain layers.
In such cases, MOHaM compensates the start times of all
the subsequent layers with dependencies on the delayed
layers. However, if a subsequent layer is executed on an
SAI that communicates with a different MI, the delay in its
start time might create a new stalled time segment. MOHaM
considers all such cases to correctly estimate the latency.
After evaluating all the stalled time segments, the latest end
time among all the layers becomes the new total latency.
To estimate the communication energy, MOHaM consid-
ers the amount of data transferred between an SAI and its
Table 3: Multi-DNN workload scenarios
# Workload Domain DNN Model
A AR/VR
Image Classification ResNet50
Image Segmentation UNet
Object Detection SSD-MobileNetV1
YOLOv3
B Edge
Image Classification ResNet50
Object Detection SSD-ResNet34
Language Processing BERT-Large
C Mobile
Image Classification MobileNetV3L
Image Segmentation DeepLabV3+ MN2
Language Processing Mobile-BERT
D Data Center
Image Classification GoogleNet
Object Detection YOLOv3
Language Processing BERT-Large
Recommendation DLRM
nearest MI and the hop distance between them following
the XY routing algorithm. It can be calculated by:
Num. SAIs
X
i=1

Bits. TransferredSAIi
× HopsXY (SAIi, MI)
× Energy/Hop/Bit

The NoP real estate is not currently considered in the
area estimation. MOHaM considers a silicon interposer-
based NoP which is outside the chiplet areas. Hence, it is
ignored while estimating the area. Nevertheless, it can be
easily included in the estimation by multiplying the number
of SAIs with a NoP router area. Depending on the number
of ports, different router areas can also be considered.
4.3.2 Convergence Criterion
The proposed MOHaM framework supports a GA stopping
criterion based on the density of the non-dominated solu-
tions presented in [32]. Alternatively, simulating for a fixed
number of generations can also be configured very easily.
5 EVALUATION
This section presents multiple experiments conducted to
evaluate the performance of the MOHaM framework.
5.1 Methodology
5.1.1 DNNs and Workloads
MOHaM is to be used at design-time of a multi-accelerator
system, where the application domains will be known or
guessed apriori. Hence, AR/VR, edge, and mobile work-
loads are considered for evaluation. Besides, standard data
center workloads are dominated by vision, language and
recommendation-based DNNs [33]. Hence, MOHaM is also
evaluated with such a workload to show its effectiveness
if the application domains can be guessed. All of them
are multi-DNN workloads created with models from the
MLPerf benchmark suite [34][35]. Table 3 presents the work-
load scenarios along with their DNN models. MOHaM takes
them as inputs in the ONNX [36] interoperable format.
5.1.2 Sub-Accelerator Templates
The following state-of-the-art constitutes the SAT library4
:
• Eyeriss [20]: Row-stationary dataflow
• Simba [3]: Weight-stationary dataflow
4. Any accelerator can be added in the template library of MOHaM.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 9
Table 4: MOHaM simulation configuration
Exploration Parameters
Num. Generations 300 Population Size 250
Sched. Cross. Prob. 0.103 Sched. Mut. Prob. 0.052
SA Cross Prob. 0.045 Template Mut. Prob. 0.041
Merging Mut. Prob. 0.042 Splitting Mut. Prob. 0.039
Mapping Mut. Prob. 0.048 Mapping Cross. Prob. 0.047
Layer Assign. Mut. Prob. 0.025 Position Mut. Prob. 0.027
Max. SA Instances 8
Common Architecture Parameters
Technology Node 45 nm DRAM Technology LPDDR4
Mem. Interface BW 4 GB/s Clock Frequency 1 GHz
Word Size 8 bits SRAM Buf. BW 16 GB/s
Eyeriss-like Template
Dataflow Row-Stat. Max. Num. of PEs 4096
Max. Shared Buf. Size 131 KiB Max. PE Scratchpad Size 0.5 KiB
Simba-like Template
Dataflow Weight-Stat. Max. Num. of PEs 64
Max. MACs per PE 64 Max. Global Buf. Size 64 KiB
Max. Weight Buf. Size 32 KiB Max. Input Buf. Size 8 KiB
Max. Accum. Buf. Size 3 KiB
ShiDianNao-like Template
Dataflow Output-Stat. Max. Num. of PEs 4096
Max. Neurons Buf. Size 131 KiB Max. Synapses Buf. Size 131 KiB
• ShiDianNao [26]: Output-stationary dataflow
They are heterogeneous accelerators and are chosen to
support diverse DNNs. Table 4 presents MOHaM configura-
tion for the experiments, where the GA exploration parame-
ters are based on the guidelines of the widely adopted [37],
and the architectural parameters are based on the state-of-
the-art [20][3][26]. For the parameter names beginning with
“Max.”, the presented values are their upper bound and are
reconfigurable. For a chosen Pareto solution, two SAIs of
the same SAT, say Eyeriss, can have different values for the
number of PEs, shared buffer size and PE scratchpad size.
The upper bound is to limit the search space for exploration.
5.1.3 Solution Anatomy
Figure 5 shows the visual solution anatomy available in
MOHaM. It shows the scheduling Gantt chart for latency,
and two pie charts for energy and area of a Pareto solution
from the AR/VR workload. The Gantt chart shows, on the
y-axis, the SAIs, and on the x-axis, the start and end times
of the execution of each layer, measured in cycles. Each bar
represents the execution of a layer of the AM on a particular
SAI. Black traces represent bandwidth-constrained execu-
tion segments as described in Section 4.3.1. The latest end
time among all the layers is the latency (makespan) of the
workload. The area pie chart displays each SAI’s contribu-
tion to the real estate of the MAS. Instances from the same
SAT have the same colour. The energy pie chart displays
each DNN’s contribution to the total energy consumption
to execute the workload. The Pareto set might have another
solution with better scheduling and silicon utilisation. The
solution anatomy helps in comparing design points.
5.2 Results
For all the results shown in Figures 7, 6, 8 and 9, the x-
axis represents energy in mJ, the y-axis represents latency in
cycles, and the size of the design points represents the area in
mm2
. A common observation valid for all these results is the
distribution of the solutions found by MOHaM. They are
spread over a large Pareto surface rather than limited to a
specific region. This is an important advantage of MOHaM
as it provides a variety of trade-off solutions to choose from.
5.2.1 Homogeneous vs Heterogeneous Accelerators
This experiment evaluates the need for heterogeneous sub-
accelerators (SAs) in multi-accelerator systems. Figure 6
shows the comparison of Pareto solutions with homo-
geneous and heterogeneous SAs. For homogeneous SAs,
MOHaM is run once, each with only Eyeriss-like, Simba-
like, and ShiDianNao-like SA templates. Then, they are
compared with the result of a complete MOHaM run for
heterogeneous SAs. It is observed that for the Edge and
Data Center workloads, Eyeriss (yellow) has lower latency at
the cost of higher energy and bigger area. On the contrary,
ShiDianNao (red) is area efficient but at the cost of very high
energy and latency. For the AR/VR and Mobile workloads,
Simba (purple) has the best energy and latency, while ShiD-
ianNao (red) has the worst latency, respectively. Among the
solutions with homogeneous SAs, Simba (purple) generally
has better energy, while ShiDianNao (red) has a better area.
With heterogeneous SAs, the solutions (black) are more
uniformly distributed. For the AR/VR workload, they have
solutions with the lowest latency, energy, and area. For
example, design point A from heterogeneous (black) can
achieve a 89.4% latency reduction compared to design point
B from Eyeriss (yellow). Heterogeneous SA-based solutions
are equally good for other workloads. For example, for
the Data Center and Edge workloads, design point A from
heterogeneous (black) can achieve a 9.72% and 20.41%
latency reduction, respectively, compared to design point B
from Simba (purple). Besides, the lowest energy solutions by
heterogeneous SAs can achieve a 24.7% reduction compared
to Simba. This is possible as layers with specific dataflow
preferences can be executed on the appropriate SAs. MO-
HaM instantiates the right set of SAs from the available
templates and maps the layers for efficient execution. The
key takeaway from this experiment is that flexible dataflow support
with heterogeneous SAs increases the scalability of a multi-
accelerator system toward diverse and emerging workloads.
5.2.2 Independent vs Simultaneous Optimisation
This experiment evaluates the need for hardware-
mapping co-optimisation in multi-accelerator systems. Fig-
ure 7 shows the comparison of Pareto solutions with
hardware-only, mapping-only and hardware-mapping co-
optimisation. For hardware-only optimisation, MOHaM is
run with only Simba-like SA templates to have a fixed
dataflow (e.g., weight-stationary), similar to ConfuciuX [14].
For mapping-only optimisation, MOHaM is run with a
fixed hardware configuration of eight heterogeneous SAs,
similar to MAGMA [10]. Finally, they are compared with the
result of a complete MOHaM run for hardware-mapping co-
optimisation. It is observed that for the AR/VR workload,
hardware-only optimisation (red) has a smaller area but
high latency and energy. This is due to the fixed mapping
(dataflow) strategy for all the layers. Whereas mapping-only
optimisation (purple) has lower latency and energy but costs
a bigger area. This is due to the fixed hardware configura-
tion. In general, hardware-only optimisation has a smaller
area but poor latency and energy across all workloads. Simi-
larly, mapping-only optimisation has lower latency but a big
area. With hardware-mapping co-optimisation, the solutions
(black) are more uniformly distributed and achieve better
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 10
0 12,000,000 24,000,000 36,000,000 48,000,000 60,000,000
Time
0
1
2
3
4
5
Sub-Accelerator
(SA)
Eyeriss
ShiDianNao
Simba
SAT
ResNet50
SSD-MobileNetV1
UNet
YOLOv3
DNN
Scheduling
Eyeriss
ShiDianNao
Simba
SAT
0
1
2
3
4
5
SA
Area
ResNet50
SSD-MobileNetV1
UNet
YOLOv3
DNN
Energy
Figure 5: Scheduling Gantt chart for latency, pie charts for area and energy breakdowns of a Pareto solution.
200 400 600
Energy [mJ]
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Latency
[cycles]
1e10 AR/VR
B
A
1000 2000 3000 4000
Energy [mJ]
0
1
2
3
4
1e10 Edge
B
A
50 100 150 200
Energy [mJ]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1e9 Mobile
1000 2000 3000 4000
Energy [mJ]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
1e10 Data Center
B A
Area [mm²] 30 60 90 120 150
Heterogeneous Simba Homogeneous ShiDianNao Homogeneous Eyeriss Homogeneous
Figure 6: Comparison of Pareto solutions with homogeneous and heterogeneous sub-accelerators.
100 150 200 250 300
Energy [mJ]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Latency
[cycles]
1e9
D
C
E
AR/VR
B
A
600 800 1000 1200
Energy [mJ]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1e9
D
B
C
E
Edge
A
30 40 50 60 70
Energy [mJ]
1
2
3
4
5
1e8
D
C
E
Mobile
B
A
400 600 800
Energy [mJ]
0
1
2
3
4
5
1e9
B
D
E
Data Center
C
A
Area [mm²] 40 80 120 160
Hardware-Mapping Co-Optimisation Mapping-Only Optimisation Hardware-Only Optimisation
Figure 7: Comparison of Pareto solutions with hardware-only, mapping-only, and hardware-mapping co-optimisation.
performance. For example, for the AR/VR workload, design
point A from co-optimisation (black) has two times the area
as design point E from hardware-only optimisation (red)
but has 55% less energy and 72% less latency. It is also
observed that mapping-only optimisation achieves similar
latency but with higher energy and a bigger area. For
example, for the Edge workload, design point B from co-
optimisation (black) has the same latency as design point D
from mapping-only optimisation (purple) but has 15.3% less
energy and 36.5% less area. Similar solutions exist in Mobile
and Data Center workloads. This results from MOHaM
instantiating the SAs with optimal hardware resources and
mapping the layers per their dataflow preferences for op-
timal execution. The key takeaway from this experiment is that
hardware-mapping co-optimisation can support diverse workloads
with the best overall performance in a multi-accelerator system.
5.2.3 Single-Objective vs Multi-Objective Exploration
This experiment evaluates the need for multi-objective ex-
ploration in multi-accelerator systems. Figure 8 shows the
comparison of individual solutions with mono-objective
and Pareto solutions with multi-objective exploration. For
mono-objective exploration, MOHaM is run once, each with
only latency, energy, and EDP as an objective. Three Linear
Combinations (LCs) of energy and latency with coefficients:
(0.25, 0.75), (0.5, 0.5), and (0.75, 0.25) are also run once.
Then, they are compared with the result of a complete
MOHaM run for multi-objective exploration. When objec-
tives conflict, the best solution for one may sometimes lead
to the worst for others with mono-objective exploration.
For example, for the Data Center workload, the solution
with energy as an objective (red) is at the extreme left
(i.e., best), but the latency is relatively high. Similarly, the
solution with latency as an objective (purple) is best, while
the area is worst. Even a slightly better solution for one
objective may sometimes lead to heavily penalising others
with mono-objective exploration. For example, for the Edge
workload, the design point with latency as an objective
(purple) is only 3% better than design point A from multi-
objective (black), but comes at the cost of 14.2% more energy
and 30.1% more area. Furthermore, the best solution for
one objective may sometimes be sub-optimal with mono-
objective exploration. For example, for the Mobile workload,
the design point with latency as an objective (purple) has
7.5% more latency, 34% more energy and 75% more area
than design point A from multi-objective (black). Even the
best solution for popular aggregated objectives, EDP, may
sometimes be sub-optimal with mono-objective exploration.
For example, compared to the design point with EDP as an
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 11
100 120 140
Energy [mJ]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Latency
[cycles]
1e8 AR/VR
A
400 600 800 1000 1200
Energy [mJ]
2
3
4
5
6
1e8
A
Edge
B
30 35 40 45 50
Energy [mJ]
5
6
7
8 1e7 Mobile
A
B
300 400 500 600
Energy [mJ]
2
3
4
5
1e8 Data Center
A
EDP Single-Objective Area [mm²] 30 60 90 120 150
Energy-Latency-Area Multi-Objective Latency Single-Objective Energy Single-Objective LC Single-Objective
Figure 8: Comparison of individual solutions with mono-objective and Pareto solutions with multi-objective exploration.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
Energy [mJ]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Latency
[cycles]
1e9
D
E
100 125 150
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
1e8
A
B
C
Area [mm²] 15 30 45 60
MOHaM CoSA DiGamma Herald-like
Figure 9: Comparison with state-of-the-art.
objective (yellow), multi-objective (black) design points A,
B, B and A from the AR/VR, Edge, Mobile and Data Center
workloads have 31.78%, 45.09%, 5.21% and 20.49% less
area, respectively, while achieving the same EDP (±0.04%).
Similarly, the other aggregated objectives, LCs, provide un-
balanced solutions towards energy despite having different
coefficients. This behaviour demonstrates that choosing co-
efficients in a weighted sum objective can be challenging
and time-consuming when searching for compromise solu-
tions. MOHaM supports distinct multi-objective exploration
and provides a Pareto set of solutions (black). Across all
workloads, it provides multiple competitive solutions with
the lowest energy, latency and area, and exposes interesting
trade-offs that can be leveraged. The key takeaway from this
experiment is that multi-objective exploration helps to identify the
most suitable design for a specific multi-accelerator system.
5.2.4 Comparison with State-of-the-Art
This experiment evaluates MOHaM-generated multi-
accelerator system designs against three popular state-of-
the-art, CoSA [12], DiGamma [19] and Herald [8]. The open-
source implementations of CoSA and DiGamma are consid-
ered while Herald is implemented by faithfully following
its evaluation settings. CoSA is a mono-objective, mapping-
only optimisation that exploits Mixed-Integer Programming
(MIP) to generate optimal mapping strategy without requir-
ing iterative scheduling leveraging the Timeloop [17] cost
model. DiGamma is a mono-objective, hardware-mapping
co-optimisation that exploits GA (similar to MOHaM) for
faster DSE leveraging the MAESTRO [38] cost model. Her-
ald is a mono-objective, hardware-mapping co-optimisation
that employs an exhaustive search and heuristic-based
scheduling for DSE of multi-accelerator systems leveraging
the MAESTRO cost model. Among the existing works on
multi-accelerator systems, Herald is the only one targeting
heterogeneous SAs, multi-DNN workloads and hardware-
mapping co-optimisation (refer Table 1). However, there are
a few important differences between Herald and MOHaM:
• Herald optimises the partitioning of the MAC bud-
get among a fixed number of heterogeneous SAs.
Whereas, MOHaM not only allows exploring the
number of optimal SAs but also their buffer sizes.
• Herald uses a manual-tuned mapper that lacks flex-
ibility and limits its scalability to diverse accelerator
templates. Whereas, MOHaM exploits GA for its
mapper that does not require tuning or modification
with any accelerator template or workload variation.
• Herald provides Pareto optimal solutions for a
mono-objective DSE. Whereas, MOHaM offers
Pareto optimal solutions for a multi-objective DSE.
Herald originally employed the MAESTRO cost model, but
to have a fair comparison with MOHaM, the Timeloop cost
model is used here. Hence the resultant implementation is
named Herald-like (and not exactly Herald). Additionally, the
number of MACs and SAIs equal to that in the maximum
configuration of MOHaM is considered for Herald-like.
CoSA and DiGamma simulations are conducted consider-
ing flexible-dataflow architectures without considering the
reconfiguration overheads. For CoSA, a Simba-like architec-
ture is considered with the number of MACs equal to that in
the maximum configuration of MOHaM. Its objective func-
tion is a linear combination of three components, compute,
traffic, and buffer utilisation. Hence, it is run with different
coefficients of these components for multiple solutions. For
DiGamma, even though it originally employed the MAE-
STRO, an equivalent implementation with the Timeloop is
also available and is used here. As DiGamma operates in
a layer-wise manner, the results of all the layers from the
workload are combined, and the area budget is set to the
maximum configuration of MOHaM.
Figure 9 shows a subset of Pareto design points ob-
tained by MOHaM along with the design points by CoSA,
DiGamma and the best subset of Herald-like for the AR/VR
workload. Table 5 presents configuration details of the spe-
cific design points (A through E) used for comparison.
MOHaM’s ability to generate Pareto design points offers
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 12
Table 5: Configuration of design points from Figure 9
Design Points
Metrics A B C D E
Latency [106 cycles] 55.76 80.59 68.33 64.12 1391.44
Memory Bound 64.69% 17.28% 100% N.A. 35.43%
Energy [mJ] 96.53 87.93 152.91 2488.94 1547.88
Area [mm2] 39.95 32.86 20.69 39.33 66.34
Compute Area 37.06% 36.25% 52.61% 17.25% 5.68%
PE Buf. Area 45.04% 43.12% 45.37% 71.85% 23.34%
Shared Buf. Area 17.90% 20.63% 2.02% 10.90% 70.98%
Total MACs 14336 16384 32768 32768 9984
Total SA Instances 7 8 1 1 3
Simba-like 7 5 1 0 2
Eyeriss-like 0 2 0 0 1
ShiDianNao-like 0 1 0 0 0
competitive alternatives to CoSA and DiGamma. For ex-
ample, design point A from MOHaM reduces latency by
18.40% and energy by 36.87% compared to design point
C from CoSA. Despite having a much higher number
of MACs, CoSA’s latency is higher than MOHaM. It can
be attributed to CoSA lacking hardware optimisation and
memory-bandwidth awareness. In fact, the whole execution
is found to be memory-bounded (refer Table 5). The higher
number of MACs (therefore PEs) experience increased com-
munication overhead, resulting in higher energy consump-
tion. As CoSA lacks hardware optimisation, its area is con-
sidered the minimum configuration of MOHaM to make a
fair comparison. Hence, design point C from CoSA has the
lowest area among all the design points from Table 5.
Similarly, design point A from MOHaM reduces latency
by 13% and energy by 96.12% compared to design point
D from DiGamma. Despite having a much higher num-
ber of MACs (same as CoSA) and hardware-mapping co-
optimisation, DiGamma’s latency is slightly higher than
MOHaM. It can be attributed to DiGamma lacking re-
configurability of the architectural template. For example,
DiGamma only has a two-level hierarchical architecture
with PE buffers and shared buffers. Whereas MOHaM al-
lows multi-level hierarchy for all the architectural templates
supported by the Timeloop cost model. It is worth mention-
ing that no information about possible memory bottlenecks
could be derived from DiGamma output logs. The energy
consumption is very high in DiGamma due to large PE
buffers. Table 5 shows that 71.85% of the DiGamma area
is occupied by local PE buffers. They generate high-energy
reads and writes, resulting in higher energy consumption.
When it comes to Herald-like, design point E is the best
EDP solution. Nevertheless, design point A from MOHaM
reduces latency by 96% and energy by 93.76% compared
to design point E. Despite having a hardware-mapping
co-optimisation with load-balance driven layer scheduling,
Herald-like’s latency and energy are much higher than
MOHaM. It can be attributed to the random nature of
Herald’s hardware and mapping search coupled with the
unavailability of multi-objective optimisation. Herald tried
to improve latency by reducing memory-bound execution.
Hence, it allocated large PE buffers and shared buffers,
leaving only 5.68% compute area (refer Table 5). This action
made the execution compute-bound, resulting in higher
latency. Moreover, large PE buffers generate high-energy
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
NoP Link Bandwidth [GB/s]
1
2
3
4
5
Latency
[cycles]
1e8
Figure 10: Latency against varying NoP link bandwidth.
reads and writes, resulting in higher energy consumption.
Furthermore, design point A from MOHaM also saves area
by 39.78% compared to design point E from Herald-like.
Designers of multi-accelerator systems would benefit
from having multiple competitive design points to choose
from, especially when there are multiple objectives. How-
ever, a mono-objective optimisation aggregates everything
into a single design point. This is acceptable as long as
there are no conflicting objectives, which is rare. For exam-
ple, when Herald’s mono-objective optimisation aggregated
latency and energy together into EDP, it is observed that
neither the latency nor the energy is reduced. Herald’s
attempt to reduce latency by allocating large buffers back-
fired and resulted into increased latency. Moreover, large
buffers are not desirable while attempting energy reduction.
Hence, this conflicting scenario resulted in enormous energy
consumption. On the other hand, a multi-objective opti-
misation offers multiple competitive design points while
respecting all the objectives and not penalising anyone. For
example, MOHaM’s multi-objective optimisation allowed
for a design point like A that could strike a balance between
latency, energy, and area without severely penalising any of
them. While there is no one-size-fits-all, based on the specific
requirements, other design points can also be considered.
For example, if energy efficiency is the preference, design
point B from MOHaM improves energy by 42.50%, 96.47%,
and 94.32% compared to CoSA, DiGamma, and Herald-like,
respectively, at the cost of an increase in latency and area.
5.2.5 Sensitivity of NoP Link Bandwidth
This experiment evaluates the correlation of performance
(latency) and NoP link bandwidth. Unlike state-of-the-art,
where the communication cost is partially or entirely ig-
nored, MOHaM implements it in detail. The communication
model considers head/serialisation delay, routing paths,
and bandwidth allocation on NoC and NoP links. Workload
latency mainly depends on: (a) SAI hosting tile positions
in NoP, (b) amount of data accessed from memory as per
the layer mappings, and (c) NoP link bandwidth. MOHaM
optimises SAI hosting tile positions to exploit maximum
available bandwidth and avoid bottlenecks. Nevertheless,
sometimes it becomes necessary to increase the bandwidth
for the desired workload latency. Figure 10 shows the la-
tency of Pareto solutions by MOHaM with varying NoP
link bandwidth for the AR/VR workload. As expected,
apart from some exceptions due to the stochastic nature of
GAs, there is a trend of decreasing latency with increasing
bandwidth. The biggest improvement is observed when the
bandwidth increases from 2GB/s to 4GB/s. It is also worth
observing that increasing the bandwidth beyond 16GB/s
does not guarantee any improvement in latency. This anal-
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 13
0 10 20 30 40 50
Percetage of Pareto Dominated individuals
Control
Layer Assignment Mutation
Scheduling Mutation
SA Merging Mutation
Mapping Mutation
SA Crossover
SA Template Mutation
Scheduling Crossover
SA Splitting Mutation
Mapping Crossover
Ablation 14.9%
15.2%
20.9%
23.9%
31.8%
38.3%
40.3%
40.8%
44.8%
48.8%
Figure 11: Ablation study of the custom GA operators.
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000 70000
Samples
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Normalised
Best
EDP
Random
MOHaM
Figure 12: Sampling efficiency of MOHaM algorithm.
ysis using MOHaM can help reduce communication costs
while maintaining the desired performance of the system.
5.2.6 Ablation Study
This experiment evaluates the effectiveness of the custom
genetic operators shown in Figure 4. It compares the result
of a complete MOHaM run with the results of runs, each
with one operator disabled (ablated). Figure 11 shows the
percentage of Pareto-dominated solutions when an operator
is ablated from the baseline MOHaM configuration (refer
Table 4). Due to multi-objective exploration, the results are
obtained as follows: (a) MOHaM is run with the default
configuration, and a baseline Pareto set of individuals is
selected from the final population. (b) MOHaM is re-run
with the same configuration to get a second Pareto set of
individuals. (c) They are compared to identify how many
individuals from the second set are Pareto-dominated by the
individuals from the baseline set. This is found to be 14.9%
and serves as the Control setting, as shown in Figure 11.
Control serves as the threshold to compare ablation results.
(d) MOHaM is run after disabling one operator to get a
new Pareto set of individuals. (e) Steps (c) and (d) are
repeated for all the operators, and the results are presented
in Figure 11. A higher percentage of Pareto-dominated indi-
viduals indicate that the operator is effective and MOHaM’s
performance will deteriorate without it. All the operators
perform better than the Control threshold, implying that
each has some significance on MOHaM’s performance.
5.2.7 Sampling Efficiency
This experiment evaluates the sampling efficiency of the
GA-based MOHaM algorithm against a random exhaustive
search. Several custom genetic operators are designed for
a faster and sample-efficient DSE with MOHaM. Figure 12
shows the normalised EDP for 70, 000 solution samples for
a DSE with random search and a DSE with MOHaM. The
trend of solution discovery with the best EDP samples is
highlighted with a curve. After these 70, 000 samples, MO-
HaM achieves 4.17× better EDP compared to the random
search. It is observed that some MOHaM solution samples
with high EDP continue to be evaluated. This is due to
the multi-objective exploration nature of the MOHaM al-
gorithm. While the solution samples from random searches
are scattered everywhere, most have poor EDP. The solution
curve shows that a DSE with MOHaM will be at least orders
of magnitude faster than with a random exhaustive search.
5.2.8 Execution Time
In the different experiment settings, MOHaM’s execution
time did not exceed eight hours, whereas CoSA took only
about an hour. CoSA formulates the scheduling space into a
MIP problem and solves it in one shot without requiring an
iterative search. The scheduling solutions are then evaluated
on the Timeloop cost model. Whereas MOHaM formulates
the design space into a multi-objective GA problem and
solves it by repeatedly querying the Timeloop. While the
iterative nature of the GA allows for a more comprehensive
exploration of the design space, it also requires more time to
converge. Hence, most of MOHaM’s execution time is spent
repeatedly querying the Timeloop despite attempts to re-
duce the number of queries through caching. In general, the
convergence time of an iterative search-based optimisation
is directly proportional to the query response time of the
cost model. Therefore, replacing the Timeloop with a faster
cost model will ideally improve MOHaM’s execution time.
It is important to note that CoSA is a compile-time
mapping-only optimisation, so it only makes sense for
CoSA to be executed as fast as possible. Whereas MOHaM
is a design-time hardware-mapping co-optimisation, so it
equally makes sense for MOHaM to be executed without
worrying about time for a more comprehensive exploration.
MOHaM is used offline and requires a one-time effort.
Hence, MOHaM’s absolute execution time is of no concern.
6 RELATED WORKS
DNN Models: Data center workloads are dominated by
vision, language and recommendation-based DNN mod-
els [33][39]. Vision models are dominated by Convolu-
tion (CONV) with some MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP) and
Fully Connected (FC) layers towards the end [27]. Lan-
guage models are dominated by MLP, Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN), embedding lookup and attention lay-
ers [40]. Whereas, recommendation models mainly con-
sists of MLP, embedding lookup and attention layers [41].
Design Space Exploration: Hardware optimisations are
used at design-time by ASICs or even at compile-time by
FPGAs. Literature has multiple heuristic as well as ML-
based hardware frameworks [14]. Mapping optimisations
are used at compile-time or even at run-time by recon-
figurable accelerators. Literature has mapping frameworks
based on heuristics [28], random search [3], mixed integer
programming [12], ML [42], etc. Hardware-mapping co-
optimisations are used at design-time. Due to the huge
cross-coupled search space, very few works have ex-
plored co-optimisation for single [19][29][42][28] and multi-
accelerator systems [8][7]. Multi-Tenancy: Until recently,
multi-tenancy has not been an important design choice
for accelerators. Google TPU [2], Microsoft Brainwave [43],
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, MONTH 0000 14
etc., focused on running a single DNN model for max-
imum throughput. The popular MLPerf benchmark suite
also focused on a single model for both, training [35]
and inference [34]. Data centers are now employing multi-
accelerator systems where throughput is not the only ob-
jective. Moreover, they have the natural ability to support
diverse DNN models as each SA could favour a specific
layer with its preferred dataflow. Hence, multi-tenancy has
garnered significant attention recently [10][9][8][7][6][5].
7 CONCLUSION
This work presents MOHaM, a framework for multi-
objective hardware-mapping co-optimisation for multi-
DNN workloads on chiplet-based accelerators. The key
takeaways are: (1) flexible dataflow with heterogeneous SAs
increases the scalability of a multi-accelerator system toward
diverse and emerging workloads, (2) hardware-mapping co-
optimisation can support diverse workloads with the best
overall performance in a multi-accelerator system, (3) multi-
objective exploration helps identify the most suitable design
for a specific multi-accelerator system, (4) a DSE with the
proposed MOHaM framework will be at least orders of
magnitude faster than with a random exhaustive search, and
(5) replacing Timeloop with a faster cost model will improve
MOHaM framework’s execution time. A practical scenario
where MOHaM could be employed is in designing a DNN-
powered Advanced Driver-Assistance System (ADAS), like
the ones used in Tesla cars [44]. Another practical scenario
could be in designing DNN-based AR/VR hardware for the
Metaverse [45]. Both of them have known workloads. Future
work includes improving the exploration of the scheduling
space to enhance the utilisation of the chiplets (SAs).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been (partially) supported by MUR project
ARS01 00592 reCITY Resilient City Everyday Revolution
and by the Spoke 1 FutureHPC & BigData of the Ital-
ian Research Center on High-Performance Computing, Big
Data and Quantum Computing (ICSC). Additionally, au-
thor A. Das gratefully acknowledges funding from the
European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation
programme under grant agreement No 101042080 (WINC).
REFERENCES
[1] “Google Edge TPUv1,” https://cloud.google.com/edge-tpu/,
2018.
[2] (2021) Google Cloud TPUv4. https://cloud.google.com/tpu/.
[3] Y. S. Shao et al., “Simba: Scaling Deep-Learning Inference with
Multi-Chip-Module-Based Architecture,” in MICRO, 2019.
[4] (2021) Cerebras CS-2. https://cerebras.net/system/.
[5] E. Baek et al., “A Multi-Neural Network Acceleration Architec-
ture,” in ISCA, 2020.
[6] Y. Choi et al., “PREMA: A Predictive Multi-Task Scheduling Algo-
rithm for Preemptible Neural Processing Units,” in HPCA, 2020.
[7] S. Ghodrati et al., “Planaria: Dynamic Architecture Fission for
Spatial Multi-Tenant Acceleration of Deep Neural Networks,” in
MICRO, 2020.
[8] H. Kwon et al., “Heterogeneous Dataflow Accelerators for Multi-
DNN Workloads,” in HPCA, 2021.
[9] Z. Liu et al., “VELTAIR: Towards High-Performance Multi-Tenant
Deep Learning Services via Adaptive Compilation and Schedul-
ing,” in ASPLOS, 2022.
[10] S.-C. Kao et al., “MAGMA: An Optimization Framework for
Mapping Multiple DNNs on Multiple Acc. Cores,” in HPCA, 2022.
[11] S. Zeng et al., “Serving Multi-DNN Workloads on FPGAs: A
Coordinated Arch, Sched, and Map Perspective,” IEEE TC, 2022.
[12] Q. Huang et al., “CoSA: Scheduling by Constrained Optimization
for Spatial Accelerators,” in ISCA, 2021.
[13] K. Hegde et al., “Mind Mappings: Enabling Efficient Algorithm-
Accelerator Mapping Space Search,” in ASPLOS, 2021.
[14] S.-C. Kao et al., “ConfuciuX: Autonomous Hardware Resource As-
signment for DNN Accelerators using Reinforcement Learning,”
in MICRO, 2020.
[15] H. Kwon et al., “Understanding Reuse, Performance, and Hard-
ware Cost of DNN Dataflow: A Data-Centric Approach,” in MI-
CRO, 2019.
[16] K. Deb et al., “A Fast and Elitist Multiobjective Genetic Algorithm:
NSGA-II,” IEEE TEVC, 2002.
[17] A. Parashar et al., “Timeloop: A Systematic Approach to DNN
Accelerator Evaluation,” in ISPASS, 2019.
[18] Y. N. Wu et al., “Accelergy: An architecture-level energy estimation
methodology for accelerator designs,” in ICCAD, 2019.
[19] S.-C. Kao et al., “DiGamma: Domain-Aware Genetic Algorithm for
HW-Mapping Co-Optimization for DNN Accelerators,” in DATE,
2022.
[20] Y.-H. Chen et al., “Eyeriss: An Energy-Efficient Reconfigurable
Accelerator for Deep Conv Neural Networks,” IEEE JSSC, 2016.
[21] E. Qin et al., “SIGMA: A Sparse and Irregular GEMM Accelerator
with Flexible Interconnects for DNN Training,” in HPCA, 2020.
[22] Y.-H. Chen et al., “Eyeriss v2: A Flexible Accelerator for Emerging
Deep Neural Networks on Mobile Devices,” IEEE JETCAS, 2019.
[23] (2018) NVDIA Deep Learning Accelerator (NVDLA). http://
nvdla.org/.
[24] A. Parashar et al., “SCNN: An Accelerator for Compressed-Sparse
Convolutional Neural Networks,” ACM SIGARCH CAN, 2017.
[25] S. Han et al., “EIE: Efficient Inference Engine on Compressed Deep
Neural Network,” ACM SIGARCH CAN, 2016.
[26] Z. Du et al., “ShiDianNao: Shifting Vision Processing Closer to the
Sensor,” in ISCA, 2015.
[27] K. He et al., “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition,” in
CVPR, 2016.
[28] X. Yang et al., “Interstellar: Using Halide’s Scheduling Language
to Analyze DNN Accelerators,” in ASPLOS, 2020.
[29] E. Russo et al., “MEDEA: A Multi-Objective Evolutionary Ap-
proach to DNN Hardware Mapping,” in DATE, 2022.
[30] A. B. Kahn, “Topological Sorting of Large Networks,” CACM,
1962.
[31] Y. Xu et al., “A Genetic Algorithm for Task Scheduling on Het-
erogeneous Computing Systems using Multiple Priority Queues,”
Elsevier Info Sci, 2014.
[32] O. Roudenko et al., “A Steady Performance Stopping Criterion for
Pareto-based Evolutionary Algorithms,” in MOPGP, 2004.
[33] M. Anderson et al., “First-Generation Inference Accelerator De-
ployment at Facebook,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.04140, 2021.
[34] V. J. Reddi et al., “MLPerf Inference Benchmark,” in ISCA, 2020.
[35] P. Mattson et al., “MLPerf Training Benchmark,” in MLSys, 2020.
[36] “Open Neural Network Exchange (ONNX),” https://github.com/
onnx/onnx, 2017.
[37] A. E. Eiben et al., “Parameter Tuning for Configuring and Analyz-
ing Evolutionary Algorithms,” Elsevier Swa and Evol Comput, 2011.
[38] H. Kwon et al., “Maestro: A Data-Centric Approach to Understand
Reuse, Performance, and Hardware Cost of DNN Mappings,”
IEEE Micro, 2020.
[39] D. Richins et al., “Missing the Forest for the Trees: End-to-End AI
Application Performance in Edge Data Centers,” in HPCA, 2020.
[40] J. Devlin et al., “BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Trans-
formers for Language Understanding,” in NAACL-HLT, 2019.
[41] U. Gupta et al., “DeepRecSys: A System for Optimizing End-to-
End At-Scale Neural Recommendation Inference,” in ISCA, 2020.
[42] Q. Xiao et al., “HASCO: Towards Agile Hardware and Software
Co-Design for Tensor Computation,” in ISCA, 2021.
[43] J. Fowers et al., “A Configurable Cloud-Scale DNN Processor for
Real-Time AI,” in ISCA, 2018.
[44] (2015) Tesla Autopilot. https://www.tesla.com/autopilot.
[45] (2021) Metaverse. https://about.meta.com/metaverse/.
