1
An FPGA-Based Open-Source Hardware-Software
Framework for Side-Channel Security Research
Davide Zoni, Andrea Galimberti, Davide Galli
Abstract—Attacks based on side-channel analysis (SCA) pose
a severe security threat to modern computing platforms, further
exacerbated on IoT devices by their pervasiveness and handling
of private and critical data. Designing SCA-resistant computing
platforms requires a significant additional effort in the early stages
of the IoT devices’ life cycle, which is severely constrained by
strict time-to-market deadlines and tight budgets. This manuscript
introduces a hardware-software framework meant for SCA
research on FPGA targets. It delivers an IoT-class system-on-
chip (SoC) that includes a RISC-V CPU, provides observability
and controllability through an ad-hoc debug infrastructure to
facilitate SCA attacks and evaluate the platform’s security, and
streamlines the deployment of SCA countermeasures through
dedicated hardware and software features such as a DFS actuator
and FreeRTOS support. The open-source release of the framework
includes the SoC, the scripts to configure the computing platform,
compile a target application, and assess the SCA security, as well
as a suite of state-of-the-art attacks and countermeasures. The
goal is to foster its adoption and novel developments in the field,
empowering designers and researchers to focus on studying SCA
countermeasures and attacks while relying on a sound and stable
hardware-software platform as the foundation for their research.
Index Terms—Side-channel analysis, RISC-V, open source,
open hardware, field-programmable gate array, system-on-chip,
Internet of things, research.
I. INTRODUCTION
HUNDREDS of billions of Internet of Things (IoT)
devices are getting more and more able to autonomously
make decisions thanks to artificial intelligence. As they get
more capable, pervasive, and interconnected through 5G and
6G networks, IoT devices continuously collect, process, and
exchange sensitive and critical data, making it paramount to
consider security during their design and whole life cycle [1].
Relying on the theoretical security provided by traditional
cryptography solutions such as AES, RSA, and SHA-3, and
by secure communication protocols such as TLS and SSH is,
however, insufficient to guarantee IoT device security. Side-
channel analysis (SCA) attacks target information collected
from executing a specific implementation of a cryptographic
scheme or security protocol rather than flaws in their specifica-
tion or the theoretical problems at their foundation [2]. Such
so-called side-channel information includes factors like the
time taken for cryptographic computations, power consump-
tion, electromagnetic emissions, and noise generated during
execution. While some fault-injection attacks disrupt the target
Davide Zoni, Andrea Galimberti, and Davide Galli are with Dipartimento
di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano, Milan
20133 Italy. E-mail: {davide.zoni, andrea.galimberti, davide.galli}@polimi.it.
This work was supported by the European Union’s Chips Joint Undertaking
(Chips JU) program under grant agreement No. 101112274 (ISOLDE).
Accepted for publication on IEEE Transactions on Computers.
device’s normal operation, many passive side-channel attacks,
such as differential power analysis (DPA), remain undetectable
by the system under attack.
While SCA attacks increasingly become serious security
threats to IoT devices, and in particular to those that operate
in public spaces and are accessible by anyone, the computing
platforms that power these devices and that handle sensitive
and critical data are, however, often not designed to protect
against them. Commercially available microcontroller-based
system-on-chips (SoCs), which provide computing and connec-
tivity capabilities to IoT devices, often execute cryptographic
applications despite not being designed with security as a
primary focus, primarily due to cost-saving considerations [3].
Meanwhile, strict time-to-market pressures, combined with
stringent constraints on energy, power consumption, and area,
along with the rapidly evolving application domain, drive a
shift towards flexible and general-purpose IoT platforms that
may support operating systems to facilitate programmability.
However, this trend towards general-purpose IoT devices results
in more complex computing platforms, making side-channel
vulnerability analysis increasingly challenging and necessitating
the adoption of novel and efficient analysis frameworks.
In this context, the open literature lacks a comprehensive
hardware-software solution to address the challenges of SCA se-
curity, particularly for modern RISC-V-based platforms, which
are promising candidates for secure-aware designs due to their
open and royalty-free instruction set architecture (ISA). The
few RISC-V security-oriented solutions, e.g., OpenTitan [4],
are not meant as general-purpose computing platforms and
do not support the development of novel SCA attack and
defense methodologies, while others focus their research effort
solely on the hardware side while disregarding the software
framework [5] or vice versa.
As new SCA attacks continue to emerge, designing novel
IoT devices that are secure against them requires providing
the system designers and security researchers with a sound
and stable hardware-software platform that lets them focus
on analyzing the security against SCA attacks and developing
countermeasures to thwart the latter. Moreover, there is a need
to not only detect the presence of vulnerabilities, i.e., of so-
called information leakage, but also to pinpoint the specific
signals in the hardware design that cause such leakage, enabling
the designers with the possibility to more easily correct their
systems and make them resistant to SCA attacks.
Contributions
This manuscript introduces JARVIS, an open-source research
framework for SCA on FPGA-based IoT-class computing
© 2025 IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TC.2025.3551936. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any
copyrighted component of this work in other works by sending a request to pubs-permissions@ieee.org.
arXiv:2407.17432v2
[cs.CR]
16
Mar
2025
2
platforms, that encompasses a complete SoC and a software
toolchain for SCA attacks and countermeasures, delivering a
comprehensive hardware-software solution that is, to the best
of our knowledge, currently lacking in the open literature.
The framework provides an IoT-class SoC that includes a
CPU based on the RISC-V ISA, dedicated hardware to enable
the implementation of state-of-the-art SCA countermeasures,
an ad-hoc debug infrastructure to maximize the observability
and controllability of the computing platform and thus simplify
the execution of SCA attacks, and support for the open source
FreeRTOS real-time operating system (RTOS). A complete flow
encompasses the configuration of the SoC, the execution of
target applications and corresponding collection of side-channel
information, and the analysis to identify SCA vulnerabilities
and leakage sources.
The goal of empowering designers and researchers to focus
solely on studying SCA countermeasures is achieved through
three main contributions.
1) Capability to identify leakage sources. Hardware security
requires not just identifying the presence of a vulnerability,
but also pinpointing the source of such leakage. The
computing platform has a minimal architecture to expose
the least leakage sources and make them eventually
simpler to identify, in addition to being easier to emulate
and cheaper in terms of area and power cost, while a
one-to-one match between the prototyped platform and
its emulated counterpart is enforced through dedicated
hardware mechanisms to enable the collection of the most
accurate side-channel signal.
2) Usability for research purposes. The framework is released
open source1
, including hardware and software, from the
SoC to the software scripts driving the SoC configuration,
compilation, prototype execution and emulation, oscil-
loscope measurement, and state-of-the-art SCA attacks,
to foster its adoption in research settings. Carrying out
an analysis through the JARVIS framework not only
provides the traditional power, performance, and area
(PPA) quality metrics, but it extends them by adding the
security dimension.
3) Complete SCA ecosystem. The framework includes dedi-
cated hardware and software support for state-of-the-art
SCA attacks and countermeasures that can be employed
out of the box to directly compare with solutions from the
literature as well as evaluate and enforce the SCA security
of the computing platform. The experimental evaluation in
this manuscript demonstrates the framework’s capabilities
and showcases the SCA attacks and countermeasures
included as part of its open-source release.
Structure of the manuscript
The rest of this manuscript is organized into five parts.
Section II provides a background on SCA attacks and coun-
termeasures and an overview of the state-of-the-art RISC-V
computing platforms and frameworks for SCA attacks and
countermeasures. Section III describes the JARVIS framework
1Sources available at https://github.com/hardware-fab/JARVIS.
and the hardware-software infrastructure that implements it.
Section IV details the key hardware and software aspects that
enable the SCA attack and countermeasure capabilities of the
framework, Section V showcases the framework capabilities
through a comprehensive experimental evaluation. Finally,
Section VI draws conclusions and discusses the future works
and developments on the proposed framework.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
A. Side-channel analysis attacks and countermeasures
A vast amount of research has tackled the complementary
topics of SCA attacks and countermeasures ever since the
emergence of SCA as a security threat [6].
SCA attacks can be classified as either non-profiled or
profiled. Non-profiled ones, such as those based on DPA [6] and
correlation power analysis (CPA) [7], only target side-channel
information that is obtained from the specific device under
attack while it is performing a computation, and then attempt
to recover the corresponding secret key by leveraging the
statistical correlation between the measured side-channel signal
and the data being processed, exploiting a partial knowledge
of the latter. Profiled attacks [8] are carried out instead by
initially making use of a replica of the device to be attacked to
identify and fine-tune the side-channel leakage model and later
employing such model to attack the actual target device, under
the assumption that the latter and its replica share identical
or at least similar leakage models [9]. Whereas SCA attacks
have traditionally employed statistical techniques, machine-
and deep-learning approaches recently emerged as promising
research avenues for more capable attacks, ranging from
identification of cryptographic operations from side-channel
power traces [10], [11] to learning-based non-profiled [12] and
profiled [13], [14] attacks.
The advancements in SCA attacks are mitigated by an
even larger research effort being devoted to identifying new
defense mechanisms against them. SCA countermeasures can
be mainly split into masking and hiding ones. Masking
countermeasures split the sensitive intermediate values into
different shares that are computed independently from each
other, with the goal of minimizing the dependency of each
share from the secret key [15]. Hiding countermeasures aim
instead to randomize or add noise to the side-channel emission
of the computing platform to be protected in order to reduce
the information leakage that can be exploited by an attacker.
Such countermeasures make use of techniques such as code
morphing, i.e., the insertion of random instructions in the orig-
inal execution flow [16], clock frequency randomization [17],
and the concurrent computation of multiple cryptographic
operations with invalid keys [18].
B. State-of-the-art RISC-V computing platforms
RISC-V has emerged as the de-facto standard ISA for IoT-
class computing platforms thanks to its modularity, enabled by
a minimal baseline instruction set whereas separate ISA exten-
sions are each devoted to a specific set of additional features,
and extensibility, given by the possibility of exploiting unused
3
Configure
1
SoC RTL
Design
constraints
RTOS
Apps
Compile
b
OS configuration
Apps compilation
Time window
boundaries
Executable
Netlist
Bitstream
Implement
a
SoC config. selection
Synthesis
Place-and-route
Bitstream generation
Execute
b
Prototype execution
Power trace collection
Power
trace
Simulate
a
Testbench simulation
Switching activity
collection
Measure
2
Switching
activity
PPA
statistics
Security
statistics
Leakage
Causes
Analyze
3
Power
Performance
Area
SCA attacks: CPA,
template, ML-based
Matching
time
window
Testbench
Power
Performance
Area
Flow
scripts
Fig. 1: High-level flow of the JARVIS framework.
opcode space to encode custom instructions and extensions
according to the specific needs of computer designers [19].
On the one hand, a variety of RISC-V-based microcontroller-
class SoCs is available, such as PULPino [20] and GAP-
8 [21], while ultra-low-power platforms also leverage RISC-V
in multi-core heterogeneous architectures, e.g., Mr. Wolf [22]
and HERO [23], and SoCs coupling hard-core CPU clusters
with programmable FPGA logic, e.g., Microchip’s PolarFire
SoC [24]. Such solutions focus on delivering good performance
with low energy and power consumption but do not address
security, especially SCA-related aspects. Moreover, due to their
nature, designers can not modify ASIC cores to implement SCA
countermeasures not originally included, drastically limiting
their usability for comprehensive SCA research.
On the other hand, multiple frameworks such as ESP [25]
and Chipyard [26] have emerged in the literature for the agile
development of heterogeneous multi- and many-core SoCs
that feature both general-purpose CPU cores and hardware
accelerators [27]. However, they focus on the modularity and
composability of the obtained computing platforms and on the
fast prototyping of the latter on FPGA targets, while they do
not consider instead any security aspects.
All the previously listed platforms, including microcontroller-
class, ultra-low-power, and heterogeneous multi- and many-core
SoCs, are capable and efficient on the computing side. However,
their complexity hinders the possibility of simulating them in an
RTL simulator, which is crucial to detecting SCA vulnerabilities
and, more importantly, accurately identifying which signals
are responsible for the information leakage, which becomes
ever more challenging to achieve as such hardware platforms
keep growing in size.
Finally, the OpenTitan project [4] delivers a hardware root
of trust (RoT) centered around a RISC-V core, not providing
instead either a complete SoC platform or a comprehensive
hardware-software framework for SCA-related research.
There also exists a variety of both RISC-V resource-
constrained and application-class cores in the open litera-
ture, e.g., CORE-V CV32E40P [28] and CVA6 [29], UCB’s
Rocket [30], and Frontgrade Gaisler NOEL-V [31], that are
however of limited use, when considered on their own, in
providing a full platform for SCA research. State-of-the-art
architectural simulators such as gem5 [32] and RISC-V-specific
GVSoC [33] operate instead at a high level of abstraction,
drastically shrinking the time required to simulate a computing
platform but conversely making them unsuitable to produce
information that can be effectively exploited by SCA attacks.
C. State-of-the-art SCA frameworks
The literature offers few solutions that are meant for the
SCA of RISC-V-based computing platforms.
lowRISC provides an open-source SCA setup for OpenTitan
[34] allows instantiating the OpenTitan RoT on a target
NewAE board and assessing the resistance of its cryptographic
accelerators to power SCA attacks. The OpenTitan platform
occupies however a large number of FPGA resources and
requires therefore targeting large and expensive FPGAs, e.g.,
AMD Kintex-7 ones, leading to non-negligible costs, and does
not offer any actuators that are suitable for protection against
SCA attacks. Moreover, the size and complexity of OpenTitan
makes it complex to modify the given design with the goal of
implementing novel SCA countermeasures, and the SCA setup
[34] lacks the ability to easily identify the leakage source in
the microarchitectural design.
ASIC-based solutions, that include mounting on NewAE’s
CW308 board an FE310-G002 daughter board [35] which
features a hard-core SiFive 32-bit RISC-V CPU but lacks any
SCA protection, have two main drawbacks. On the one hand,
pinpointing the side-channel leakage within the microarchitec-
ture is not easily achievable due to the limited observability
and closed-source nature of the computing platform. On the
other hand, the researcher can not easily modify the hardware
to implement SCA countermeasures.
Finally, NewAE’s CW305, CW310, and CW340 boards also
allow the users to flash their own custom bitstreams, including
4
RISC-V-based computing platforms. This requires however
either porting a third-party computing platform to the new
target or designing a new one, and both paths notably require
a large amount of effort.
Conversely, a large part of the literature in the SCA research
field targets instead more outdated hardware such as the
STM32 32-bit Arm Cortex-M [36] and ATmega 8-bit AVR [37]
microcontrollers, highlighting the need to foster novel SCA-
related research on modern IoT-class computing platforms.
III. FRAMEWORK
The JARVIS framework enables thoroughly evaluating the
vulnerability to SCA attacks of cryptographic applications
executed on an IoT-class SoC that implements countermea-
sures through dedicated hardware support. The possibility to
accurately match the emulated and prototype execution of
the computing platform allows not only detecting information
leakage, but even more importantly identifying its sources,
which is paramount to fixing the vulnerabilities of the SoC
during the design phase. Section III-A outlines the high-
level flow for the proposed framework, while Section III-B
discusses how such flow is implemented in a hardware-software
infrastructure.
A. High-level flow
The JARVIS framework, depicted in Figure 1, can be
described as a sequence of three main phases devoted to 1) con-
figuring the hardware-software setup, 2) measuring SCA-related
information from simulation and prototype execution, and
3) analyzing such information to detect leakage and identify its
sources. Remarkably, the open-source nature of the framework,
as well as the adoption of standard languages for all the inputs
and its internals, enable the users to tinker, adapt, and tailor
it to their needs. Software scripts automate the execution of
each of the three phases, which are discussed in more detail
in the rest of this section.
1) Configure: The high-level flow starts with the configu-
ration of the hardware and software parts of the target to be
simulated and prototyped. The SoC is thus configured by the
user and is implemented according to the standard hardware
design flow, while the applications and, optionally, the RTOS
are compiled to produce an executable to be run by the CPU.
a) Implement: The framework provides the RTL descrip-
tion of the SoC and the design constraints files that define the
frequency of the clock signal and map the I/O to the target
FPGA chip, thus enabling the deployment on the prototype
board. The initial step requires selecting which additional
components to instantiate in the SoC, the parameterization
for configurable aspects of the SoC, and which FPGA to target,
then an EDA toolchain is leveraged for the synthesis and place-
and-route of the netlist and the generation of the corresponding
FPGA bitstream.
b) Compile: During this phase, the source code for the
applications provided by the user of the JARVIS framework
is compiled, through a compiler toolchain for RISC-V, to be
executed on the target platform, both in simulation and on the
prototype. The compilation produces an executable file for the
compiled applications and, optionally, the RTOS, meant to be
executed by the computing platform both in simulation and on
the prototype FPGA. The boundaries for the time window of
interest in the execution of the application, e.g., the computation
of a specific cryptographic kernel of which to evaluate SCA
resistance, are also extracted from the executable file.
2) Measure: Once the netlist and bitstream for SoC have
been generated and the applications have been compiled, the
simulation and prototype execution can be carried out to collect
the measurements meant to be used for SCA purposes. The
simulation produces switching activity statistics, while a power
trace is measured from an oscilloscope connected to the board
during the prototype execution. The simulation and prototype
execution are notably time-aligned, i.e., synchronized, through
dedicated hardware features implemented in the target SoC
platform. Such synchronization enforces indeed a temporal
match between the switching activity obtained from simulation
and the power trace measured during the prototype execution.
a) Simulate: The simulation, in a SystemVerilog testbench
provided as part of the framework, of the post-place-and-route
netlist of the SoC running the compiled application executable
produces the switching activity of the internal signals of the
SoC in the time window of interest.
b) Execute: After flashing the bitstream to the FPGA
mounted on the prototype board, the SoC is fed the application
binary to be loaded into memory and then executes it. An
oscilloscope collects the power trace measurement for the
execution of the target application on the prototype board
within the time window of interest, matching the one employed
in the corresponding simulation.
3) Analyze: The final phase of the JARVIS framework
foresees the analysis of the measurements from the previous
phase, i.e., the switching activity of the simulation and
the power consumption trace of the board execution, both
corresponding to the time window of interest and synchronized
with each other. Two degrees of analysis are supported by the
synchronization and alignment between the switching activity
and the power trace. On the one hand, SCA leakage and
the corresponding time instant are detected from the physical
power traces. On the other hand, and more importantly, such
alignment helps to identify the specific signals of the design
under analysis which are responsible for the SCA leakage,
providing an in-depth understanding of the leakage behavior
that drastically eases the subsequent ad-hoc design of effective
countermeasures. A set of state-of-the-art SCA techniques,
ranging from CPA and template to ML-based ones, is therefore
provided to evaluate the SCA security of the platform and the
application executed on top of it. Remarkably, the analysis
phase also produces the traditional power, performance, and
area (PPA) metrics.
B. Hardware-software infrastructure
The hardware-software infrastructure depicted in Figure 2
realizes the high-level flow described in Section III-A by means
of three main components, namely 1) a (virtual) prototype,
2) an oscilloscope, and 3) a host PC. This part discusses in
detail the three components and how they interact with each
other to deliver the JARVIS framework.
5
SoC
Memory
User
UART
CPU FPU
Global
debug unit
CPU local debug unit System
UART
TX
RX
Accel. TRNG
Wishbone interconnect
DFS
DFS local
debug unit
(Virtual) prototype VDD
Trg
Oscilloscope
Host PC
FreeRTOS
App N
App 1 ...
TX
RX
Measure
2
Analyze
3
Configure
1
Timer
ChA
ChB
Fig. 2: Hardware-software infrastructure that implements the JARVIS framework.
1) (Virtual) prototype: The computing platform at the foun-
dation of the proposed SCA research framework implements
an SoC architecture that can notably be instantiated as a
prototype on FPGA, to collect the power trace measurements
from an oscilloscope, as well as emulated as a virtual prototype
in a RTL simulator that instantiates its post-place-and-route
netlist in a testbench, to generate the matching VCD switching
activity. The correspondence between the prototype and its
virtual counterpart, in particular in how they execute a target
application, is enforced by dedicated hardware mechanisms and
it is the crucial aspect that enables employing our framework
for SCA analysis.
The SoC architecture is built around a Wishbone interconnect.
It comprises a CPU, a dynamic frequency scaling (DFS)
actuator, and a global debug unit as its masters and a memory,
a user UART, a true random number generator (TRNG), and a
timer as its bus slaves.
The single-core, in-order, five-stage pipelined, 32-bit RISC-V
CPU implements the base integer (I) and integer multiplica-
tion and division (M) RISC-V 32-bit ISA extensions [38].
Supporting only I and M extensions, i.e., the bare minimum
extensions for an IoT-class CPU, provides the simplest and
most observable setup, making it easier to carry out the side-
channel analysis. A floating-point unit (FPU) [39]–[41] can
be optionally instantiated as a functional unit of the CPU to
expand the computational capabilities of the SoC, enabling
the execution of floating-point-intensive applications without
affecting the overall side-channel resistance of the computing
platform. The interconnect consists of two separate 64-bit
Wishbone data and instruction buses, both supporting single
read and write transactions as well as burst ones, according
to a modified Harvard architecture to minimize contention.
The DFS actuator enables changing at run time the frequency
of the clock signal fed to the CPU, whereas the rest of the
SoC operates at a fixed clock frequency. A global debug unit
and local debug units connected to the former in a point-to-
point fashion compose the debug infrastructure of the SoC. The
global debug unit interacts with the host PC through the system
UART while two different channels support its communication
with the rest of the SoC. Memory location of the memory-
mapped bus slaves are accessed through Wishbone reads and
writes, while dedicated lines connect the global debug unit to
the two local ones that manage the CPU and DFS actuator,
respectively.
The main memory, making use of the block RAM (BRAM)
resources available on AMD FPGAs, is instantiated as a slave
on the Wishbone data bus. The bus slaves include a TRNG,
that produces a sequence of random bits meant to be used in
cryptography and SCA countermeasure tasks, a timer, which
enables support for FreeRTOS, and a user UART, that provides
an I/O interface for the application. Hardware accelerators
exposing a Wishbone interface can also notably be added as
memory-mapped bus slaves to the SoC to extend its capabilities.
The implementation phase of the proposed flow includes
the selection of which parts of the SoC to instantiate, e.g., the
optional DFS actuator, TRNG, and timer, and the configuration
of its parametric features, e.g., the baud rate of the UART
interface, the width of the instruction and data buses, and the
branch prediction scheme of the CPU.
In addition to the UART I/O interfaces, the prototype exposes
the FPGA voltage (VDD in Figure 2), which is related to the
power consumption of the whole FPGA chip, and a trigger
signal (Trg), that is driven by the local debug unit of the CPU.
2) Oscilloscope: Power measurements from the prototype
execution are carried out through an oscilloscope with two
analog channels and a frequency bandwidth that is sufficient
to collect samples from the target platform under measurement
without aliasing. The oscilloscope is connected to the prototype
board, with an analog channel measuring the voltage of the
FPGA and the other one monitoring a signal meant to trigger
the data acquisition on the former. It is managed through a USB
interface by the host PC, which takes care of its configuration
and receives the data samples measured from the board on
both analog channels.
3) Host PC: The host PC drives the whole JARVIS
framework through the flow software scripts, which manage the
interaction with both hardware devices, namely the prototype
board and the oscilloscope, and software tools, such as the
EDA and compilation toolchains and state-of-the-art SCA attack
scripts. Matching the high-level flow previously described in
6
SoC
DFS
Global debug unit
System
UART
TX
RX
Wishbone interconnect
DFS
DFS local
debug unit
(Virtual) prototype
VDD
Trg
pc
run
pmc reg halt
Address V
Triggerpoint table
Breakpoint table
=
CPU debug
FSM logic
D Q
Msg ↔
UART
fin
fout
Manage
DFS debug
Manage
CPU debug
Manage
mem.-mapped
Trg
clkout
clkref
clkref
To host PC
To oscilloscope
Debug
request
messages
Debug
response
messages
rnd
CPU local debug unit
CPU
=
Address V
Digital noise
source
Post-
processing
TRNG
Counting
logic
Timer
irq
Fig. 3: Detailed microarchitecture of the debug subsystem, timer, and TRNG.
Section III-A, we can identify three main top-level scripts that
drive the corresponding phases of the framework.
a) Configure: The configuration script leverages an EDA
toolchain for the synthesis and place-and-route and bitstream
generation of the SoC, previously configured according to
the needs of the user, also taking as its inputs the XDC
constraint files that include information about the internal clock
signals as well the I/O mapping on the target FPGA chip. A
RISC-V compiler toolchain is employed instead to compile
the applications and, optionally, the RTOS. The compilation
of the sources can thus include the sources for FreeRTOS,
when targeting the execution of applications on top of the
RTOS, or not, when the goal is instead bare-metal execution.
A linker script and startup routines to be executed before the
program’s main function are included to support the latter case.
The compilation process produces an executable file, that can
be loaded into the memory of the computing platform to be
executed both in its simulation and on the prototype FPGA.
Boundaries for a time window of interest are obtained from the
executable to enable accurately matching, also from a temporal
standpoint, the simulation of the computing platform with its
prototype execution.
b) Measure: The simulation leverages an RTL simulator
to simulate the post-place-and-route netlist of the SoC inside
a SystemVerilog testbench provided as part of the framework.
The testbench loads the VMEM for the target application into
the memory of the target SoC and drives the execution of the
application according to the time window boundaries extracted
from its ELF file at the previous phase. The simulation outputs
a value change dump (VCD) that contains all the switching
activity of the internal signals of the SoC corresponding to the
execution of the application within the time window of interest
The prototype execution requires, after flashing the bitstream
to the FPGA mounted on the prototype board, feeding the
application binary to the SoC to be loaded into its memory. The
flow script properly drives the board execution through the SoC
debug interface, matching the behavior of the SystemVerilog
testbench, and manages the oscilloscope connected to the board
to collect the power trace of the execution. The VCD from the
simulation and the power trace from the prototype execution
are saved to a data storage device, so that they can be later
retrieved for performing the various analyses.
c) Analyze: The VCD obtained from the simulation and
the power traces collected from the prototype execution, both
corresponding to the exact same time window, are retrieved
from the storage where they were saved to analyze them
through a set of state-of-the-art SCA techniques, including
CPA, template, and ML-based attacks, to detect whether there
was any cryptographic information leakage and also identify
the eventual sources of the latter. In addition to the SCA
security statistics, the analysis phase outputs the traditional PPA
metrics leveraging the power consumption measured from the
board execution, the cycle-granularity latency collected from
simulation, and the resource utilization reports from netlist
implementation. The outputs of the computation can also be
obtained through the debug infrastructure to further check the
correct functioning of the system.
IV. MICROARCHITECTURE
Dedicated hardware and software mechanisms enable the
SCA attack and countermeasure capabilities of the proposed
framework. The debug subsystem, with its breakpointing and
ad-hoc triggering mechanism, ensures maximum observability
and controllability of the computing platform, thus allowing the
collection of accurate side-channel information that can then
be exploited by SCA attacks of different kinds. A TRNG, a
DFS actuator, and a timer can instead be optionally instantiated
in the SoC to enable support for a variety of state-of-the-art
SCA countermeasures ranging from masking to hiding ones.
The rest of this section delivers a detailed discussion of the
microarchitecture of the debug subsystem, TRNG, DFS actuator,
and timer.
A. Debug subsystem
The framework provides maximum observability and control-
lability of the computing platform through the hardware support
7
Read request
15 0
15 0
Write request
Offset
Bit
0x0
0x2
0x4
0x0
0x2
0x4
0x6
0x8
Message
15 7 0
8
7 0
0x0
0x2
0x4
0x0
Read response
Write response
COMMAND
COMMAND
COMMAND
COMMAND
ADDRESS [15:0]
ADDRESS [31:16]
DATA [15:0]
DATA [31:16]
ADDRESS [15:0]
ADDRESS [31:16]
DATA [23:8]
DATA [31:24]
DATA [7:0]
(a) Debug messages
Memory-mapped request
15 0
6
141312 10 9 5
Local-debug-unit request
Bit
Message
15 0
6
1110 5
Response
7 0
1
2
TOKEN_TYPE
SEL
W
BTE CTI
TOKEN_TYPE
CPU_ID
Reserved
Reserved A E
(b) Command field
TOKEN TYPE R/W Destination Group
INVALID Read
Memory-
Invalid
mapped
MMAP READ Read Memory- Memory-
MMAP WRITE Write mapped mapped
GPR INT32 READ Read
CPU local CPU
GPR INT32 WRITE Write
debug unit registers
GPR FPU32 READ Read
GPR FPU32 WRITE Write
HALT CPU Read
CPU local CPU reset/
RUN CPU Read
debug unit resume/halt
RST CPU Read
GET DULOCAL STATE Read
GET CPU PC Read
ADVANCE ONE STEP Read CPU local CPU
ECHO FRONTEND Write debug unit stepping
GET LOW CYCLECNT Read
CPU local Performance
GET HIGH CYCLECNT Read
debug unit counters
GET LOW INSTRCNT Read
GET HIGH INSTRCNT Read
SET BRKPNT CPU Write
CPU local Breakpoints
GET BRKPNT CPU Read
debug unit configuration
RM BRKPNT CPU Write
GET NUM BRKPNT CPU Read
SET TRGPNT CPU Write
CPU local Triggerpoints
GET TRGPNT CPU Read
debug unit configuration
RM TRGPNT CPU Write
GET NUM TRGPNT CPU Read
SET FREQ DFS Write
DFS local DFS
GET FREQ DFS Read
debug unit configuration
RND FREQ DFS Write
(c) Token types
Fig. 4: Debug messages supported by the proposed framework: (a) structure and width of the debug messages, (b) encoding of
the command field, (c) token types of the request messages. Legend: BTE burst type extension, W write enable (0: read, 1:
write), CTI cycle type identifier (for burst mode), SEL select, TOKEN TYPE request message type, Reserved reserved for
future use, CPU ID identifier for target local debug unit, A ack, E error; BTE, W, CTI, and SEL refer to Wishbone.
for breakpoints and triggerpoints as well as a dedicated debug
infrastructure that exposes a GDB-like debug interface, thus
enabling the collection of accurate side-channel information
that can then be targeted by SCA attacks of different kinds. This
part discusses first the global-local debug microarchitecture,
then focuses on the breakpointing and triggering mechanisms,
and finally provides an overview of the debug capabilities that
can be exploited by the external host PC.
1) Global and local debug units: The debug subsystem
enables controlling and observing the whole SoC through a
message-based protocol. It is composed of a global debug
unit and of a number of local debug units. The global one,
that acts as a master on the Wishbone bus, receives debug
messages through a system UART interface and accordingly
communicates both with the other bus masters, through point-
to-point connections to local debug units that act as adapters
to interface with such masters, and with the bus slaves, with
whom it interacts directly through the bus by exploiting their
memory-mapped nature.
Two local debug units are instantiated for the CPU core and
for the DFS actuator, respectively, to act as adapters between
the global debug unit and the two bus masters. The local
debug unit interface with the global one is common to all the
local debug units, while the interface with the CPU or DFS
actuator is custom tailored to the specific interactions that are
implemented with such module. The CPU local debug unit can
access the program counter (PC), registers, and performance
monitoring counters (PMCs) of the CPU, as well as halt, reset,
and restart it and advance its execution by a single step. The
DFS one can set a new target clock frequency for the DFS
actuator, get the frequency of the current clock signal generated
and configure the DFS to randomly switch the frequency of
the clock signal. Figure 3 depicts the microarchitecture of the
debug subsystem of the SoC, highlighting the global debug
unit, the CPU and DFS local debug units, and their interactions
with each other as well as with the CPU and the DFS actuator.
2) Breakpoints and triggerpoints: The CPU local debug unit
supports, through its interaction with the CPU, a traditional
breakpointing system coupled with an ad-hoc triggering one.
Breakpoints enable halting the CPU when the PC matches their
corresponding addresses, while triggerpoints, an ad-hoc variant
of breakpoints, are meant to toggle a trigger signal that drives
the data acquisition from the oscilloscope and do not instead
halt the CPU, which is kept regularly running. The local debug
8
unit for the CPU contains two tables for the breakpoint and
triggerpoint addresses, respectively, as shown in Figure 3. Both
tables include a configurable number of entries, each composed
of a 32-bit address that corresponds to an instruction in the
target application and a 1-bit flag that signals its validity.
The valid addresses in the breakpoint table are constantly
checked against the current PC of the CPU, whose value is
passed to the CPU local debug unit. Whenever there is a match
between a valid breakpoint address and the current PC, the
CPU is halted until it is resumed through a dedicate debug
command. The triggerpoint table entries are similarly compared
against the PC, but a match between the latter and a triggerpoint
address produces a notably different effect. Rather than halting
the CPU as in a traditional breakpoint fashion, reaching a
triggerpoint toggles a 1-bit signal that is mapped on an I/O
pin of the prototype board to be used as a trigger signal for
an oscilloscope.
3) Debug messages: The debug infrastructure exposes a
request-response protocol to interface with the SoC through
the system UART. The communication is indeed carried out
as a sequence of request and response messages. Notably, no
new request message can be issued until the previous request
has been completed and the corresponding response message
has been sent back. Figure 4 summarizes the width, structure,
and information encoded in the various messages depending
on whether they are request or response and read or write and
on whether they are intended for memory-mapped recipients
or local debug units.
Request messages can be of four types, depending on whether
they correspond to read or write actions and whether their
recipients are memory-mapped devices or bus masters. All
request messages are composed of a 16-bit command and a
32-bit, while write requests also comprise a 32-bit data, as
shown in Figure 4a. The command field encodes different
information depending on whether the debug message targets a
memory-mapped peripheral or a local debug unit, as depicted
in Figure 4b. Debug request messages that can be sent to the
SoC through the system UART include, as listed in Figure 4c,
i) memory-mapped reads and writes, ii) register reads and
writes, iii) commands to reset, resume, and halt the CPU,
advance its execution by a single step, and get its current state
and program counter, iv) commands to retrieve performance
monitoring counters v) commands to set, get, and remove both
the breakpoints and the triggerpoints, and vi) commands to set
and get the target clock frequency for the DFS actuator and
configure it to randomly switch clock frequencies.
Response messages can be instead of only two types, i.e.,
either read or write ones. The former include data as part of
the response, while the latter only acknowledge the completion
of the requested operation or the occurrence of an error.
B. TRNG
The TRNG is a Wishbone slave peripheral that exposes
a set of 32 random bits through a memory-mapped register.
The TRNG can be configured in the architecture of the digital
noise sources and post-processing methods that compose it to
obtain different results in terms of FPGA resource utilization,
MMCMA
DFS
Reconfig.
FSM logic
fin
lockA
clkref
rnd
TRNG
0
1
Decoder
addr data
MMCMB
clkoutB
clkoutA
lockB
B
A
params
clkout
cfgA
cfgB
isMst
ack
frnd
fout
BRAM
Fig. 5: Detailed microarchitecture of the DFS actuator.
throughput, and security. A digital noise source produces the
actual entropy underlying the random number generation, while
a post-processing method improves the statistical and security
properties of the TRNG. Three digital noise sources and three
post-processing methods from the literature are provided with
the proposed framework to implement the TRNG component.
The digital noise sources that can be instantiated in the TRNG
module are NLFIRO, PLL-based, and edge-sampling ones, and
they can be coupled with XOR, Von Neumann, and LFSR
post-processing methods [42]. The random output produced by
the TRNG component is periodically refreshed and exposed by
a memory-mapped register that can be read through Wishbone.
C. DFS actuator
The DFS actuator, whose microarchitecture is depicted in
Figure 5, leverages two mixed-mode clock manager (MMCM)
components to provide a glitch- and latency-free switching
between different clock frequencies at run time [17]. It receives
as its inputs a target clock frequency (fin in Figure 5), a
1-bit flag to enable random DFS (rnd), and a reference
clock signal (clkref), and it outputs the generated clock
signal (clkout) and the current clock frequency (fout). The
rnd flag selects the actual target clock frequency for the DFS
reconfiguration between the one received through the fin input
by the DFS local debug unit and a random value frnd output by
an internal TRNG with similar to the one in Section IV-B. Such
target clock frequency, registered to be output to the DFS local
debug unit and readable through a dedicated debug command,
is decoded and used as an address to select a corresponding set
of MMCM configuration parameters from the BRAM memory.
Notably, the clock signal output by the MMCMs of an AMD
FPGA remains low during its reconfiguration, thus causing a
clock-gating effect on the computing platform. The proposed
DFS actuator avoids such negative effect by employing two
MMCM components (MMCMA and MMCMB in Figure 5), among
which the FSM logic selects a master and a slave. The master
MMCM keeps generating the output clock signal while the
slave one is under reconfiguration, after which their roles are
swapped. An ack signal monitors the locking status (locki)
of the two MMCMs to prevent triggering a new reconfiguration
through the cfgi flag while the previous one is still in progress.
The clkout clock output by the DFS actuator is selected
9
through the isMst 1-bit flag as the one output by the current
master between the clkoutA and clkoutB clock signals output
by the two MMCMs, respectively.
The flexible design of the DFS architecture supports up
to 1024 different clock frequency configurations. The BRAM
memory can indeed store up to 1024 user-defined sets of
MMCM configuration parameters, with a minimum step of
0.125MHz and lowest and highest achievable clock frequencies
of 5MHz and 800MHz, respectively, due to MMCM feasibility
constraints. Random reconfiguration is activated through a
debug request (RND_FREQ_DFS in Figure 4c), which is
dispatched to the DFS local debug unit that in turn asserts
the rnd input flag. When rnd is set to 1, the MMCMs keep
indeed reconfiguring to new clock frequencies as soon as the
previous reconfiguration has been completed, i.e., the ack
signal to the FSM is asserted.
D. Timer and FreeRTOS support
The timer is a memory-mapped peripheral that exposes
two 64-bit registers which can be accessed through read and
write requests on the Wishbone interconnect. The two registers
correspond to the current time, which gets increased by 1 at
each clock cycle, and to the time threshold. Once the current
time is greater than the time threshold, an interrupt request to
the CPU is raised by setting to 1 the content of a 1-bit register.
Instantiating a timer in the SoC notably enables executing
the FreeRTOS real-time operating system and thus providing
support for implementing coarse-grained multithreading.
V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
The experimental campaign aims to showcase how the
JARVIS framework delivers an effective research platform
for SCA attacks and countermeasures on FPGA targets.
Section V-A lists the hardware and software required by the
framework, Section V-B details the specific setup employed
for the experimental evaluation, and Section V-C delivers an
analysis of the SCA techniques provided out of the box.
A. Hardware and software requirements
The framework makes use of widely available devices
and tools, including the development board and FPGA chips
for prototyping, the digital oscilloscope for power trace
measurement, and the software required for the various phases
of the flow, ranging from EDA synthesis and place-and-route
to compilation and SCA resistance evaluation.
1) Prototype: XDC design constraint files are provided for
prototyping on the NewAE Technology CW305 Artix FPGA
Target board, specifically designed for power analysis and fault
injection attacks against hardware cryptographic functions2
. The
CW305 board mounts a BGA socket that can accommodate
any chip from the AMD Artix-7 mid-range FPGA family,
which is the most widely adopted in academic and industrial
research, including the security and cryptography fields [43].
The proposed SoC fits into AMD Artix-7 50 chips, which pack
2More information on NewAE Technology CW305 Artix FPGA Target
available at https://rtfm.newae.com/Targets/CW305%20Artix%20FPGA.
TABLE I: Breakdown of the SoC’s FPGA resource utilization.
FPGA resource utilization
Component LUT FF DSP BRAM
CPU 4386 3192 4 0
DFS 822 225 0 1.5
Global debug unit 286 248 0 0
CPU local debug unit 875 587 0 0
DFS local debug unit 19 29 0 0
Memory 206 138 0 64
TRNG 2486 1252 0 0.5
Timer 144 163 0 0
System UART 365 292 0 0
User UART 359 284 0 0
Overall SoC 10667 7563 4 66
32600 look-up tables (LUT), 65200 flip-flops (FF), 120 digital
signal processing (DSP) blocks, and 75 36kb blocks of block
RAM (BRAM), and larger ones from the same family.
2) Oscilloscope: Power measurements are carried out
through an oscilloscope from the Pico Technology PicoScope
5000 Series family, which features a 200MHz maximum
bandwidth and can collect up to 1 billion samples per second
at a resolution ranging from 8 to 16 bits3
. The oscilloscope
has its A analog channel connected to the board through a
coaxial SMA connector to measure the FPGA voltage, while
its B analog channel is connected to a general-purpose I/O pin
that outputs the trigger signal which marks the start and the
end of the computation.
3) Host PC: The host PC must be able to execute the
AMD Vivado toolchain for the synthesis, place-and-route, and
bitstream generation targeting AMD Artix-7 FPGAs, as well
as for the simulation and switching activity VCD collection.
The host PC is also in charge of the compilation of the
application sources, optionally together with the FreeRTOS
ones, through a C compiler toolchain for RISC-V targets.
Drivers and software for the CW305 board and PicoScope
5000 oscilloscope, connected to the host PC through USB
interfaces, are required to drive the prototype execution and
power trace collection. All the VCD, power trace, area, and
execution time data is stored permanently on a disk mounted
on the host PC to be used in the analysis phase. Support for
Python 3.9 or higher is necessary to run the software scripts
that manage the whole framework as well as the scripts that
implement state-of-the-art SCA attack techniques.
B. Experimental setup
1) Software setup: The framework is run in Ubuntu 22.04.3
LTS on a host PC that features an Intel i7-10700 CPU and a
64GB DDR4 memory. The host PC includes ChipWhisperer
5.1.0 software and PicoScope 7 software and drivers to
manage the CW305 board and the oscilloscope, respectively.
Applications are compiled with GCC 11.4.0 to be executed
on the SoC either bare-metal or on top of FreeRTOS 11.0.1.
AMD Vivado ML 2023.1 is employed for the RTL synthesis,
place-and-route, bitstream generation, and simulation.
3More information on Pico Technology PicoScope 5000 Series available at
https://www.picotech.com/oscilloscope/5000/picoscope-5000-specifications.
10
2) Hardware setup: The FPGA target in the experimental
evaluation is an Artix-7 100 (xc7a100tftg256-1) chip mounted
on a CW305 board. The oscilloscope is a PicoScope 5244D,
that features two analog channels and a 200MHz bandwidth.
The SoC to be prototyped on FPGA and simulated is configured
with a CPU that implements the RV32IM instruction set, a
256kB main memory, and a TRNG, a DFS actuator, and a timer
that enable support for all the included state-of-the-art SCA
countermeasures. Table I lists the FPGA resource utilization
resulting from synthesis and place-and-route targeting 100 MHz
and 50MHz clock frequencies for the CPU, driven by the DFS
actuator, and the rest of the SoC.
3) Breakpoints and triggerpoints: Two triggerpoint ad-
dresses are assigned, respectively, the addresses of instructions
in the target application between which to acquire the power
measurement from the oscilloscope. In particular, reaching the
start triggerpoint address raises a trigger signal mapped on an
I/O pin of the prototype board, and such trigger signal stays
high until the PC holds a value matching the end triggerpoint,
thus toggling the trigger signal down to 0. Two breakpoints
are also leveraged, coupled with the triggerpoints, to manage
the oscilloscope’s behavior. A breakpoint is configured to an
address that is reached before the start triggerpoint one is
employed to interrupt the CPU computation in order to get the
oscilloscope ready to perform the acquisition, while another
breakpoint is instead assigned to an address being encountered
after the acquisition time window to interrupt again the CPU
computation and dump the collected data that is stored in the
oscilloscope’s buffer.
Such combined usage of the breakpoints and triggerpoints
in the prototype execution scenario is accurately replicated in
the simulation one for two main purposes. On the one hand,
it enables a perfect match from the temporal point of view
between the switching activity VCD collected in the simulation
and the power trace acquired by the oscilloscope during the
prototype execution. On the other hand, it makes it possible to
collect the VCD solely for the time window of interest to the
SCA analysis, thus limiting the simulation’s execution time.
The latter is a particularly critical aspect due to the need to
perform a timing simulation of a post-route netlist to have
maximum correspondence with the design prototyped on the
board and thus collect meaningful switching activity statistics.
C. Experimental analysis
The experimental analysis applies to the computing platform,
configured as described in Section V-B, the SCA countermea-
sure and attack techniques from the state of the art included
in the framework, quantitatively assessing their effectiveness.
1) SCA countermeasure techniques: The SCA counter-
measures include microarchitecture-level ones, such as clock
frequency randomization, and architecture- and OS-level ones,
such as the morphing and chaff techniques.
Clock frequency randomization: The DFS actuator can be
used to continuously vary, in a random fashion, the frequency
of the clock signal fed to the CPU, as previously described in
Section IV-C, with the purpose of producing a distortion in the
power consumption trace and therefore reducing the informa-
tion leakage [17]. The DFS, when in random reconfiguration
Algorithm 1 Chaff SCA countermeasure [44].
1: function CHAFFENCRYPT (cipher, key, ptx, numChaff)
2: mainThread ← CREATE (cipher, key, ptx)
3: chaffKey ← GENERATECHAFFKEYS (key, numChaff)
4: for i in 1 to numChaff do
5: chaffThreads[i] ← CREATE (cipher, chaffKey[i], ptx)
6: STARTRANDOMSCHEDULER (mainThread, chaffThreads)
7: while ISRUNNING (mainThread) do
8: WAIT ()
9: for i in 1 to numChaff do
10: KILL (chaffThreads[i])
mode, uses indeed as its target frequencies the values generated
by the internal TRNG, rather than setting them through the
debug infrastructure. The DFS actuator produces a clock signal
that can be reconfigured to up to 1024 different frequencies
every few tens of microseconds and without any glitching and
gating effects, enabling a large variability and ensuring the
effectiveness of the countermeasure.
Morphing: The morphing countermeasure leverages the
TRNG to randomly modify the execution of a cryptographic
operation [36]. For example, in the AES use case consid-
ered in the experimental evaluation, morphing targets the
AddRoundKey and SubBytes steps of the AES cryptosystem.
Each AddRoundKey execution employs a randomly selected
version of the XOR operation, chosen among 8 equivalent
implementations with different power consumption profiles.
SubBytes executions are instead morphed by using S-Boxes
that are masked by random values and periodically refreshed.
Chaff: The TRNG component and the support for software
multithreading provided by FreeRTOS enable the adoption of
the chaff approach, described in [44] and whose pseudocode
is listed in Algorithm 1. The latter technique executes, con-
currently to a thread for the actual instance of a cipher (line
2 in Algorithm 1), e.g., the encryption of a plaintext with a
certain key, a set of additional threads performing the same
cryptographic operation on the same input but with different
keys, properly generated to be correlated with the original
one (lines 3–5). All the threads are started and executed in
parallel, according to a random scheduler that leverages the
SoC’s TRNG (line 6), until the thread performing the actual
cryptographic operation has completed (lines 7–10).
2) SCA attack techniques: The SCA attacks provided out
of the box by the framework include 1) a CPA attack [7], that
extracts the secret key of the target cryptosystem executions by
correlating their power signature with their operating behavior,
performed in the experimental campaign on up to 1 million
power traces, 2) a template profiled attack [9], that leverages
the Bayes’ theorem to estimate the probability of a key given
its multivariate normal distribution, carried out by using 1024
traces for each of the 256 possible key bytes during both
the profiling and attack phases, and 3) an ML-based attack
leveraging convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [37], that
learn a recurrent pattern of the leakage to predict the secret
key and whose training and inference are carried out on the
same dataset as the template attack.
11
TABLE II: Quality metrics obtained by attacks to AES
execution on the experimental platform when implementing
different countermeasures. Undefined values are denoted by –.
Attack
Countermeasure Quality metric CPA Template CNN
None
Guessing entropy 1 1 1
Guessing distance – 0.86 0.77
Success rate 100% 100% 100%
Number of traces 180 3 10
Software masking
Guessing entropy 108.75 153.22 1.06
Guessing distance – -0.57 0.45
Success rate 0% 0% 98%
Number of traces – – –
Clock frequency
Guessing entropy 112.75 127 72.20
randomization
Guessing distance – -0.52 -0.31
Success rate 0% 0% 6%
Number of traces – – –
Morphing
Guessing entropy 1 1 1
Guessing distance – 0.38 0.81
Success rate 100% 100% 100%
Number of traces 3072 580 8
Chaff
Guessing entropy 105.25 135 122
Guessing distance – -0.52 -0.48
Success rate 0% 0% 0%
Number of traces – – –
3) SCA security assessment: The experimental analysis
assesses first the vulnerability of the computing platform to
the previously described attacks while executing the AES-
128 cryptosystem. We make use of the constant-time, S-box-
based AES-128 C implementation from the widely adopted
OpenSSL [45] cryptography suite. In particular, we evaluate
whether each attack, specifically targeting the SubBytes step
of the first AES round, succeeds or fails when executing the
plain AES cryptosystem without any protection, a software-
masked version of AES, and plain AES protected by the clock
frequency randomization, morphing, and chaff SCA hiding
countermeasures.
The attacks’ effectiveness is evaluated according to 1) the
guessing entropy, defined as the average rank position of the
correct key among all possible key guesses, 2) the guessing
distance, which represents the normalized probability distance
between the correct key and the first-ranked non-correct one,
3) the success rate, i.e., the percentage of attacks that succeed
in delivering the secret key, and 4) the minimum number of
traces required to obtain a prediction that is always correct.
Table II lists the values of such four quality metrics obtained
for the various countermeasure-attack combinations considered
in the experimental campaign. In particular, the attacks that
always succeed, i.e., with guessing entropy equal to 1 and
100% success rate, respectively, list the corresponding number
of traces employed to achieve such a perfect attack outcome.
The execution of the plain AES application is successfully
attacked by all three considered techniques, while the masked
version is broken only by the CNN attack. The clock frequency
randomization and chaff countermeasures prove instead to
be effective against the three SCA attacks, whereas applying
morphing does not protect the computing platform from any
of them.
1 200 400 600 800 1000
Traces
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Peak
PCC
0.0
Correct key
Wrong key
(a) Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) of CPA attack
1 3 5 7 9 11 13
Traces
1
25
50
75
100
125
Guessing
entropy
Template
CNN
(b) Guessing entropy of template and CNN attacks
Fig. 6: SCA attacks against unprotected AES.
More in detail, clock frequency randomization and chaff
are the most effective countermeasures against the proposed
SCA attacks, as they achieve a high guessing entropy and
a success rate close to 0% in every scenario. The morphing
countermeasure is instead shown to be more vulnerable, as
every technique can break it. The CNN attack can isolate the
correct key with a guessing distance of 0.81, using only eight
traces, while CPA and template attacks are less effective though
successful. Guessing distance values are notably undefined for
the CPA attack, since the latter is not a probabilistic attack.
Guessing distance measures indeed a probability distance and,
thus, it is suitable only for attacks such as template and CNN
ones that compute the probability of a key guess being correct.
Figure 6 depicts how the SCA attacks against the execution
of plain AES evolve as the number of traces increases when
applying no SCA countermeasure. The CPA attack, as shown in
Figure 6a, requires 180 traces to correctly identify the correct
key. More traces are needed to reduce the correlation coefficient
of the wrong key guesses, drawn in red, whereas the Pearson
correlation coefficient (PCC) of the correct key, drawn in green,
remains steadily around 0.43. Figure 6b demonstrates instead
how the guessing entropy improves in the template and CNN
attacks as more traces get analyzed and how it stabilizes to 1
after 3 and 10 traces have been processed, respectively.
To further demonstrate the flexibility of the proposed
hardware-software framework, Table III reports the results of
the template attack when the computing platform executes three
additional cryptographic applications from the OpenSSL [45]
suite, namely, the Camellia, Clefia, and Seed block ciphers. For
each evaluated cryptosystem, results are reported considering
no countermeasures, the use of clock frequency randomization,
the use of morphing and the use of chaffing. The reported
quality metrics to assess the side-channel vulnerability refer to
the SubBytes operation in the first round of each cryptosystem.
12
TABLE III: Quality metrics obtained by template attacks
to Camellia, Clefia, and Seed execution when implementing
different countermeasures. Undefined values are denoted by –.
Cryptosystem
Countermeasure Quality metric Camellia Clefia Seed
None
Guessing entropy 1 1 1
Guessing distance 0.28 0.61 0.23
Success rate 100% 100% 100%
Number of traces 1202 52 1021
Clock frequency
Guessing entropy 133.09 105.53 132.63
randomization
Guessing distance -0.49 -0.45 -0.50
Success rate 0% 0% 0%
Number of traces – – –
Morphing
Guessing entropy 9 1 55.75
Guessing distance -0.06 0.31 -0.31
Success rate 40% 100% 3%
Number of traces – 1379 –
Chaff
Guessing entropy 148.06 119.72 133.84
Guessing distance -0.56 -0.48 -0.56
Success rate 0% 0% 0%
Number of traces – – –
The results show that applying morphing to protect Clefia is
ineffective against template attacks, whereas it is moderately
and highly effective in the Camellia and Seed use cases,
respectively. Conversely, the clock frequency randomization
and chaff countermeasures are shown to successfully thwart
the template attack when applied during the execution of all
three cryptographic applications.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This manuscript introduced a novel open-source framework
for research on SCA targeting FPGA-based IoT-class computing
platforms. The framework includes a RISC-V-based IoT-class
SoC that features an ad-hoc debug infrastructure to maximize
the observability and controllability of the computing platform
and thus simplify the execution of SCA attacks, as well as
a DFS actuator, a TRNG, and a timer that provide support
for a set of state-of-the-art SCA countermeasures available
out of the box. A complete automated flow encompasses the
configuration of the SoC, the execution of target applications
and corresponding collection of side-channel information, and
the analysis to identify eventual SCA vulnerabilities and
pinpoint the sources of side-channel information leakage.
The user is encouraged and empowered to expand the
capabilities of the hardware-software infrastructure and support
novel SCA attacks and countermeasures by the open-source
nature of the framework, its adoption of standard languages
for both its hardware and software components, and the usage
of widely available devices and tools.
Future developments foresee the addition of a dual-core
CPU architecture and of accelerators specifically dedicated to
cryptography purposes. Such optional features, limited in terms
of additional resources to still deliver a lightweight IoT-class
computing platform, will not compromise the observability
and controllability of the system for SCA, which are essential
for detecting side-channel leakage and its sources. In addition,
we plan to extend our framework to support research on fault
attacks and countermeasures against the latter.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, V. Saxena, D. Jain, P. Goyal, and B. Sikdar,
“A Survey on IoT Security: Application Areas, Security Threats, and
Solution Architectures,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 82 721–82 743, 2019.
[2] X. Lou, T. Zhang, J. Jiang, and Y. Zhang, “A Survey of Microarchitectural
Side-Channel Vulnerabilities, Attacks, and Defenses in Cryptography,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, jul 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3456629
[3] A. Barenghi, L. Breveglieri, N. Izzo, and G. Pelosi, “Exploring Cortex-M
Microarchitectural Side Channel Information Leakage,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 156 507–156 527, 2021.
[4] A. Meza, F. Restuccia, J. Oberg, D. Rizzo, and R. Kastner, “Security
Verification of the OpenTitan Hardware Root of Trust,” IEEE Security
& Privacy, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 27–36, 2023.
[5] T. De Cnudde, M. Ender, and A. Moradi, “Hardware Masking, Revisited,”
IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
vol. 2018, no. 2, p. 123–148, May 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://tches.iacr.org/index.php/TCHES/article/view/877
[6] P. Kocher, J. Jaffe, and B. Jun, “Differential Power Analysis,” in Advances
in Cryptology — CRYPTO’ 99, M. Wiener, Ed. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1999, pp. 388–397.
[7] E. Brier, C. Clavier, and F. Olivier, “Correlation Power Analysis with a
Leakage Model,” in Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems
- CHES 2004, M. Joye and J.-J. Quisquater, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 16–29.
[8] F.-X. Standaert, F. Koeune, and W. Schindler, “How to Compare Profiled
Side-Channel Attacks?” in Applied Cryptography and Network Security,
M. Abdalla, D. Pointcheval, P.-A. Fouque, and D. Vergnaud, Eds. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 485–498.
[9] S. Chari, J. R. Rao, and P. Rohatgi, “Template Attacks,” in Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems - CHES 2002, B. S. Kaliski, ç. K.
Koç, and C. Paar, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2003, pp. 13–28.
[10] G. Chiari, D. Galli, F. Lattari, M. Matteucci, and D. Zoni, “A Deep-
Learning Technique to Locate Cryptographic Operations in Side-Channel
Traces,” in 2024 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference &
Exhibition (DATE), 2024, pp. 1–6.
[11] D. Galli, G. Chiari, and D. Zoni, “Hound: Locating Cryptographic
Primitives in Desynchronized Side-Channel Traces using Deep-Learning,”
in 2024 IEEE 42nd International Conference on Computer Design
(ICCD), 2024, pp. 114–121.
[12] B. Timon, “Non-Profiled Deep Learning-based Side-Channel attacks with
Sensitivity Analysis,” IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware
and Embedded Systems, vol. 2019, no. 2, p. 107–131, Feb. 2019. [Online].
Available: https://tches.iacr.org/index.php/TCHES/article/view/7387
[13] J. Kim, S. Picek, A. Heuser, S. Bhasin, and A. Hanjalic, “Make some
noise. Unleashing the power of convolutional neural networks for profiled
side-channel analysis,” IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware
and Embedded Systems, pp. 148–179, 2019.
[14] D. Galli, F. Lattari, M. Matteucci, and D. Zoni, “A Deep Learning-
Assisted Template Attack Against Dynamic Frequency Scaling Counter-
measures,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 293–306,
2025.
[15] H. Gross, S. Mangard, and T. Korak, “Domain-Oriented Masking:
Compact Masked Hardware Implementations with Arbitrary Protection
Order,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Workshop on Theory
of Implementation Security, ser. TIS ’16. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, p. 3. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2996366.2996426
[16] G. Agosta, A. Barenghi, and G. Pelosi, “A code morphing methodology
to automate power analysis countermeasures,” in Proceedings of the
49th Annual Design Automation Conference, ser. DAC ’12. New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2012, p. 77–82.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2228360.2228376
[17] D. Galli, A. Guarisco, W. Fornaciari, M. Matteucci, and D. Zoni, “The
Impact of Run-Time Variability on Side-Channel Attacks Targeting
FPGAs,” in 2024 31st IEEE International Conference on Electronics,
Circuits and Systems (ICECS), 2024, pp. 1–4.
[18] A. Barenghi, W. Fornaciari, G. Pelosi, and D. Zoni, “Scramble Suit:
A Profile Differentiation Countermeasure to Prevent Template Attacks,”
IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits
and Systems, vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 1778–1791, 2020.
[19] A. Waterman, Y. Lee, D. A. Patterson, and K. Asanović, “The
RISC-V Instruction Set Manual, Volume I: User-Level ISA, Version
2.1,” EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, Tech.
13
Rep. UCB/EECS-2016-118, May 2016. [Online]. Available: http:
//www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2016/EECS-2016-118.html
[20] A. Traber, F. Zaruba, S. Stucki, A. Pullini, G. Haugou, E. Flamand, F. K.
Gurkaynak, and L. Benini, “PULPino: A small single-core RISC-V SoC,”
in 3rd RISCV Workshop, 2016.
[21] E. Flamand, D. Rossi, F. Conti, I. Loi, A. Pullini, F. Rotenberg, and
L. Benini, “GAP-8: A RISC-V SoC for AI at the Edge of the IoT,”
in 2018 IEEE 29th International Conference on Application-specific
Systems, Architectures and Processors (ASAP), 2018, pp. 1–4.
[22] A. Pullini, D. Rossi, I. Loi, G. Tagliavini, and L. Benini, “Mr.Wolf: An
Energy-Precision Scalable Parallel Ultra Low Power SoC for IoT Edge
Processing,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 54, no. 7, pp.
1970–1981, 2019.
[23] A. Kurth, B. Forsberg, and L. Benini, “HEROv2: Full-Stack Open-Source
Research Platform for Heterogeneous Computing,” IEEE Transactions
on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 4368–4382,
2022.
[24] Microchip Technology Inc., DS00004248C - PolarFire SoC Datasheet,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemD
ocuments/documents/FPGA/ProductDocuments/DataSheets/PolarFire-S
oC-Datasheet-DS00004248.pdf
[25] P. Mantovani, D. Giri, G. Di Guglielmo, L. Piccolboni, J. Zuckerman,
E. G. Cota, M. Petracca, C. Pilato, and L. P. Carloni, “Agile SoC
Development with Open ESP,” in Proceedings of the 39th International
Conference on Computer-Aided Design, ser. ICCAD ’20. New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3400302.3415753
[26] A. Amid, D. Biancolin, A. Gonzalez, D. Grubb, S. Karandikar, H. Liew,
A. Magyar, H. Mao, A. Ou, N. Pemberton, P. Rigge, C. Schmidt,
J. Wright, J. Zhao, Y. S. Shao, K. Asanović, and B. Nikolić, “Chipyard:
Integrated Design, Simulation, and Implementation Framework for
Custom SoCs,” IEEE Micro, vol. 40, no. 4, p. 10–21, jul 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/MM.2020.2996616
[27] G. Montanaro, A. Galimberti, and D. Zoni, “A Prototype-Based Frame-
work to Design Scalable Heterogeneous SoCs with Fine-Grained DFS,” in
2024 IEEE 42nd International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD),
2024, pp. 681–684.
[28] M. Gautschi, P. D. Schiavone, A. Traber, I. Loi, A. Pullini, D. Rossi,
E. Flamand, F. K. Gürkaynak, and L. Benini, “Near-Threshold RISC-V
Core With DSP Extensions for Scalable IoT Endpoint Devices,” IEEE
Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 25,
no. 10, pp. 2700–2713, 2017.
[29] F. Zaruba and L. Benini, “The Cost of Application-Class Processing:
Energy and Performance Analysis of a Linux-Ready 1.7-GHz 64-Bit
RISC-V Core in 22-nm FDSOI Technology,” IEEE Transactions on Very
Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 2629–2640,
2019.
[30] Y. Lee, A. Waterman, H. Cook, B. Zimmer, B. Keller, A. Puggelli,
J. Kwak, R. Jevtic, S. Bailey, M. Blagojevic, P.-F. Chiu, R. Avizienis,
B. Richards, J. Bachrach, D. Patterson, E. Alon, B. Nikolic, and
K. Asanovic, “An Agile Approach to Building RISC-V Microprocessors,”
IEEE Micro, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 8–20, 2016.
[31] N.-J. Wessman, F. Malatesta, J. Andersson, P. Gomez, M. Masmano,
V. Nicolau, J. L. Rhun, G. Cabo, F. Bas, R. Lorenzo, O. Sala, D. Trilla,
and J. Abella, “De-RISC: the First RISC-V Space-Grade Platform for
Safety-Critical Systems,” in 2021 IEEE Space Computing Conference
(SCC), 2021, pp. 17–26.
[32] N. Binkert, B. Beckmann, G. Black, S. K. Reinhardt, A. Saidi, A. Basu,
J. Hestness, D. R. Hower, T. Krishna, S. Sardashti, R. Sen, K. Sewell,
M. Shoaib, N. Vaish, M. D. Hill, and D. A. Wood, “The gem5
simulator,” SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News, vol. 39, no. 2, p. 1–7, aug
2011. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2024716.2024718
[33] N. Bruschi, G. Haugou, G. Tagliavini, F. Conti, L. Benini, and D. Rossi,
“GVSoC: A Highly Configurable, Fast and Accurate Full-Platform
Simulator for RISC-V based IoT Processors,” in 2021 IEEE 39th
International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD), 2021, pp. 409–
416.
[34] LowRISC, “ot-sca - Side-Channel Analysis and Fault Injection Setup
for OpenTitan,” https://github.com/lowRISC/ot-sca, 2024, accessed:
2024-11-05.
[35] NewAE Technology Inc., “CW308T-FE310,” 2020, accessed: 2024-11-05.
[Online]. Available: https://rtfm.newae.com/Targets/UFO%20Targets/C
W308T-FE310-G002
[36] G. Agosta, A. Barenghi, G. Pelosi, and M. Scandale, “The MEET
Approach: Securing Cryptographic Embedded Software Against Side
Channel Attacks,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of
Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 1320–1333, 2015.
[37] R. Benadjila, E. Prouff, R. Strullu, E. Cagli, and C. Dumas, “Deep
learning for side-channel analysis and introduction to ASCAD database,”
Journal of Cryptographic Engineering, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 163–188, 2020.
[38] G. Scotti and D. Zoni, “A fresh view on the microarchitectural design
of FPGA-based RISC CPUs in the IoT Era,” Journal of Low Power
Electronics and Applications, vol. 9, p. 19, 02 2019.
[39] D. Zoni, A. Galimberti, and W. Fornaciari, “An FPU design template to
optimize the accuracy-efficiency-area trade-off,” Sustainable Computing:
Informatics and Systems, vol. 29, p. 100450, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2210537920301761
[40] D. Zoni and A. Galimberti, “Cost-effective fixed-point hardware
support for RISC-V embedded systems,” Journal of Systems
Architecture, vol. 126, p. 102476, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1383762122000595
[41] L. Denisov, A. Galimberti, D. Cattaneo, G. Agosta, and D. Zoni, “Design-
time methodology for optimizing mixed-precision CPU architectures on
FPGA,” Journal of Systems Architecture, vol. 155, p. 103257, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1
383762124001942
[42] D. Galli, A. Galimberti, W. Fornaciari, and D. Zoni, “On the Effectiveness
of True Random Number Generators Implemented on FPGAs,” in
Embedded Computer Systems: Architectures, Modeling, and Simulation,
A. Orailoglu, M. Reichenbach, and M. Jung, Eds. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2022, pp. 315–326.
[43] National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) - U.S. Department
of Commerce, “NISTIR 8413, Status Report on the Third Round of
the NIST Post-Quantum Cryptography Standardization Process,” https:
//nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2022/NIST.IR.8413.pdf, 2022.
[44] G. Agosta, A. Barenghi, G. Pelosi, and M. Scandale, “Information
leakage chaff: feeding red herrings to side channel attackers,” in
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Design Automation Conference, ser.
DAC ’15. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2015. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2744769.2744859
[45] OpenSSL, “TLS/SSL and crypto library,” https://github.com/openssl/ope
nssl, 2024, accessed: 2024-01-11.
Davide Zoni, PhD, is associate professor at Politec-
nico di Milano, Italy. He published more than 50
papers in journals and conference proceedings. His
research interests include RTL design and verification
of single- and multi-cores at the edge with emphasis
on low power, hardware security, and deep learning.
He filed two patents on cyber-security, and he is
co-founder at Blue Signals, a spin-off of Politecnico
di Milano.
Andrea Galimberti, PhD, is a research fellow at
Politecnico di Milano. He received his M.Sc. degree
in Computer Science and Engineering in 2019 and his
PhD degree in Information Technology in 2023, both
from Politecnico di Milano. His research has explored
hardware acceleration of post-quantum cryptography
and architectures for mixed-precision computing
integrating floating-point and fixed-point arithmetic.
His current interests focus on designing multi-core
architectures and accelerators for deep learning.
Davide Galli, MSc, is a PhD student at Politecnico
di Milano, Italy. He received the B.Sc. in Ingegneria
Informatica and the M.Sc. in Computer Science and
Engineering at Politecnico di Milano in 2019 and
2022, respectively. Starting from his M.Sc. thesis
on true random number generators on FPGA, his
research interests are mainly on hardware security
and side-channel analysis.
