IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. XX, NO. X, APRIL 2024 1
Self-Adaptive Intermediate Resonator in a 3-coil
Inductive Link for Power and Data Transmission
Andrés Seré , Student Member, IEEE, Leonardo Steinfeld , Member, IEEE,
Simon Hemour , Senior Member, IEEE, and Pablo Pérez-Nicoli , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper presents an innovative approach that
dynamically adapts the intermediate resonator to enable efficient
transmission of power and data over the same inductive link. The
proposed intermediate resonator presents a tuned and high-Q
response during power transmission, promoting high efficiency in
the link. However, when the data transmission begins, it automat-
ically adjusts its response to enable proper communication. Two
different approaches for modifying the resonator response during
data transmission are tested: 1) dynamically reducing the quality
factor, and 2) dynamically detuning the resonator. The proposed
resonator is designed, implemented, and applied to an actual
commercial system to demonstrate its effectiveness. The selected
proof-of-concept system is a low-frequency RFID link, widely
used for cattle identification. Detuning the resonator, instead
of reducing its quality factor, during data transmission was
demonstrated to achieve greater reading distances. Measurements
results show that the proposed resonator increases the RFID
reading distance by up to ≈300 % (from 16 cm to 65 cm)
compared to not using a resonator, and up to ≈50 % (from
43 cm to 65 cm) compared to using a regular resonator without
the proposed dynamic adaptation. Hence, this study validates
the concept of employing batteryless self-adaptive resonators in
inductive power links.
Index Terms—wireless power transfer, 3-coil link, RFID, inter-
symbol interference (ISI)
I. INTRODUCTION
INDUCTIVE coupling is the most commonly used method
for wirelessly transferring energy over short distances. For
instance, among its many applications, it is widely used for
active implantable medical devices (AIMDs) [1]–[3] and for
low and high-frequency radio frequency identification (RFID)
[4]. The use of intermediate resonators (n-coil links) between
the transmitter (Tx) and the receiver (Rx), has been extensively
studied [5]–[7], demonstrating that it is an effective method
Manuscript received December 11, 2023; revised Junary 31, 2024; accepted
DD MM YY. Date of publication DD MM YY; date of current version DD
MM YY. This work was supported in part by CAP and CSIC from Universidad
de la República, Uruguay, and by the French National Research Agency ANR-
21-CE19-0015-01.
Andrés Seré and Leonardo Steinfeld are with the Instituto de Ingenierı́a
Eléctrica, Facultad de Ingenierı́a, Universidad de la República. Montevideo,
Uruguay (e-mail: asere@fing.edu.uy; leo@fing.edu.uy).
Simon Hemour is with the IMS Laboratory, University of Bordeaux,
Bordeaux, France (e-mail: simon.hemour@u-bordeaux.fr).
Pablo Pérez-Nicoli is with the Instituto de Ingenierı́a Eléctrica, Facultad
de Ingenierı́a, Universidad de la República. Montevideo, Uruguay, and also
with the IMS Laboratory, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France (e-mail:
pablop@fing.edu.uy).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier DOI
Fig. 1. Block diagram of the proposed slef-adaptive resonator.
to improve link efficiency and transmission distance. From
an intuitive perspective, we may consider the intermediate
resonator to operate analogously to a repeater/relay. Due to
its resonant nature, it is easily excited at the carrier frequency,
and the resulting induced current also contributes to generating
magnetic field. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that
these resonators are not only beneficial when positioned in
intermediate locations; many studies incorporate resonators in
the same plane as the Tx or Rx coil [1], [8], [9] to enhance
various performance characteristics of the link.
The larger the quality factor (Q) of the intermediate res-
onator(s), the Tx, and Rx coils, the higher the efficiency that
can be achieved by the link. On the other hand, a high-Q
reduces the bandwidth of the link, affecting data transmission
over it. The higher the Q of a resonator, the longer it takes
for an oscillation to decay after the excitation source is turned
off. This causes each bit transmitted in the link to take longer
to decay and remain oscillating in high-Q resonators, thereby
interfering with the next transmitted bit. This is an undesired
phenomenon known as inter-symbol interference (ISI).
One approach to mitigate ISI is to transmit suppression
pulses after each bit, aiming to decrease the amplitude of
the transmitted bit before sending the next one [10]–[12].
This solution complicates the data transmitter implementation
and requires the use of extra energy to actively dampen the
sent pulses. This may not be viable in some applications,
such as RFID, where the energy availability at the tag is
low. Additionally, in many applications, there are already
numerous tags in use, and replacing them may be impractical.
Therefore, it is preferable to propose changes to the reader
0000–0000/00$00.00 © 2021 IEEE
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. XX, NO. X, APRIL 2024 2
or the intermediate resonator. A simpler solution, which is
currently used in low-frequency RFID systems, is to limit the
Q of the coils used to values that enable communication, albeit
at the expense of reducing the power transfer efficiency [4].
In this paper, we present a novel resonator that can maintain
a tuned high-Q response while energy is being transferred and
automatically attenuates its response when data transmission
starts. The proposed resonator is utilized in a low-frequency
RFID system that is widely employed for cattle identification,
forming a 3-coil link. Fig. 1 depicts a diagram of the RFID
system used. When an intermediate resonator is not used, the
system, which is an actual commercial RFID low-frequency
system, achieves a reading distance of 16 cm. In [4], a
resonator with limited Q was designed to enhance efficiency
without affecting data transmission, thereby increasing the
reading distance to 43 cm. In this study, we employed the same
reader, intermediate resonator, and tag used in [4]. However,
rather than introducing a resistor that constantly decreases
the Q of the intermediate resonator, we implemented the
proposed self-adaptive circuit that only reduces Q (by adding a
resistor) when necessary (during data transmission). Moreover,
we also evaluate the performance of adding a capacitive ele-
ment, instead of a resistor, thereby detuning the intermediate
resonator instead of reducing its Q, which was proved to
achieve a larger reading distance. The impact on the ISI of
introducing a resistive or capacitive element into the resonator
is further elucidated in Section III-C. Compared to using
the regular limited Q intermediate resonator proposed in [4],
the proposed self-adaptive resonator increases the maximum
reading distance by ≈ 50 % (from 43 cm to 65 cm).
The concept behind implementing this 3-coil cattle RFID
system is to position the intermediate resonator at one or
more locations along the cattle chute or cattle loading ramp.
This simplifies or even enables the automation of the reading
process using a handheld reader. It is worth emphasizing
that while this article implements the self-adaptive resonator
for a specific RFID link, the proposed concept of using
intermediate resonators capable of dynamically adjusting their
Q or resonance frequency can be applied to other systems.
Dynamic Tx or Rx adjustments have been extensively
employed for various purposes, including resonance tuning
[13]–[15], output voltage regulation [16], and enhancing power
or link efficiency [17], [18]. However, there are only a few
instances in the literature where an intermediate resonator
is dynamically adapted [8], [9]. Furthermore, these previous
works involve a wired connection between Rx and the interme-
diate coil, which is not the case in this study. Additionally, the
modification of the intermediate resonator is carried out for a
different purpose; [8] tries to deal with a varied distance range,
alignment, and load impedance in real-time, while [9] aims to
implement constant current and constant voltage sources for
charging a battery.
This paper is organized as follows. First, in Section II, the
RFID system used as a proof-of-concept is presented. Next,
in Section III, we delve into the design of the self-adaptive
intermediate resonator. Measurements of the RFID system and
the most critical signals involved are outlined in Section IV.
Finally, Section V summarizes the main conclusions.
Fig. 2. Graphic illustration of the operating principle of the half-duplex RFID
system used in this work.
II. LOW-FREQUENCY RFID LINK DESCRIPTION
In these cattle RFID systems, the charging phase (energy
transmission from the reader to the tag) and the reading
phase (data transmission from the tag to the reader) are time-
interleaved, which is known as half-duplex communication.
Fig. 2 graphically illustrates the operation of the link, which
is described below. The charging phase operates at a carrier
frequency of 134.2 kHz and typically spans 50 ms. After
this elapsed time, the reader halts coil excitation, swapping
the voltage driver for a sensing circuit to detect the tag’s
response. The tag rectifies the received signal during the
charging phase, storing the energy in a capacitor. The tag
identifies the end of the charging phase by detecting the
absence of induced voltage in its antenna. Subsequently, the
tag utilizes the stored energy in the capacitor to respond with
its unique identification number (reading phase), employing
FSK modulation (134.2 kHz and 123.2 kHz for the 0 and 1
bits, respectively). During the reading phase, the tag transmits
each bit for 16 cycles, and the transmission of the entire ID
takes approximately 15 ms [4], [6].
In these half-duplex communication systems, the reading
process can fail due to two reasons: 1) the tag does not receive
enough energy to transmit its complete ID, which will be
referred to as “Charging limit”, or 2) the reader is unable to
receive and decode the tag’s transmitted ID correctly, which
will be referred to as “Reading/decoding limit”. In the 2-coil
RFID link described here, the reading range is limited by
the charging phase. Beyond approximately 16 cm, the energy
received by the tag is insufficient, thus, the transmission of
its ID is interrupted (due to the insufficient energy) before
completion.
This 2-coil RFID link system avoids ISI due to having the Q
of the coils limited by design. However, when an intermediate
resonator is included, there is a risk of introducing ISI if
its Q value is not carefully controlled. In [4], a maximum
reading distance of 43 cm was achieved by designing a Q-
limited resonator. For distances larger than 43 cm, a higher Q
is required to energize the tag, resulting in ISI that impedes
the reader’s to decode the received signal. Lowering the Q to
mitigate ISI prevents the tag from achieving full energization.
This trade-off in Q, which results in the two different non-
reading situations (“Reading/decoding” and “charging” limits),
is visually depicted in Fig. 3.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. XX, NO. X, APRIL 2024 3
Fig. 3. Illustration of the trade-off in selecting the quality factor (Q) of the
intermediate coil: a high-Q generates ISI, whereas a low-Q prevents the tag
from fully charging.
III. PROPOSED SELF-ADAPTIVE CIRCUIT
A. Main idea
This paper presents the design and implementation of a
novel batteryless resonator capable of self-adjusting its re-
sponse (either its Q or resonant frequency) to surpass the
trade-off discussed in the preceding section and depicted in
Fig. 3.
The magnetic field produced by the reader during the charg-
ing phase is significantly greater than that generated by the
tag during the reading phase. Consequently, the intermediate
resonator detects the end of the charging phase by recognizing
the falling edge of the magnetic field envelope, as depicted in
Fig. 4. At this point, and for a duration longer than the tag’s
response time (15 ms), to prevent the occurrence of ISI, an
impedance ZL is introduced in parallel to the intermediate
coil, whether resistive or capacitive, as further discussed in
Section III-C.
B. Proposed circuit
The system described in Fig. 4 is implemented by the circuit
shown in Fig. 5, where LA and RA model the intermediate
resonator coil with its equivalent series resistance, and CA
is a capacitor adjusted to achieve resonance at the power
carrier frequency (134.2 kHz). MOSFETs M1 and M2 work
as switches; when they turned on, the impedance ZL is added
in parallel with the LA-CA resonator. The diodes D1 to D4
form a full-wave rectifier. Resistor R1 limits the energy taken
from the inductive link, and, in conjunction with R2, C1 and
the diodes, implements an envelope detector, VC1. Capacitor
CS stores the peak of the envelope and, also, the necessary
energy to power-on the transistors M1 and M2. When the
envelope (VC1) falls, it turns on the thyristor implemented
through Q1 and Q2, resulting in the activation of transistors
M1 and M2. Resistors R3 and R4 are pull-downs and the zener
diode DZ limits the voltage to avoid damaging the transistors.
The full-wave rectifier ensures that the source of the MOSFET
transistors (and hence its body) are at the minimum circuit
potential (neglecting the diodes voltage dropout).
Fig. 4. Graphical representation of the proposed self-adaptive resonator.
LA
RA
CA
M1 M2
ZL
D3
D1 D2
D4
R1
R2 C1
VC1
D5
Q2
Q1
R4
R3
VG
CS
VCS
DZ
134.2 kHz
resonator
Envelope detector
Falling edge detector
Fig. 5. Schematic of the self-adaptive resonator circuit (operation is illustrated
in Fig. 4). LA ≈ 648 µH, RA ≈ 13.3 Ω, CA ≈ 2.17 nF, M1 and M2 are
ZVNL120A, D1..5 are 1N4148, R1 = 100 kΩ, R2..4 = 1 MΩ, C1 = 1 nF,
Q1 is BC547, Q2 is BC557, CS = 100 nF and VZ = 16 V.
C. Impedance ZL discussion
In this section, it is discussed why detuning the intermediate
resonator (capacitive ZL) also proves effective in addressing
ISI, similar to reducing the quality factor (resistive ZL).
To grasp this discussion, it is important to recall that during
the reading phase, the bit 0 is encoded at the same frequency as
the power carrier used during the charging phase (134.2 kHz),
thus aligning with the resonant frequency of the intermediate
coil. In contrast, bit 1 is encoded at a lower frequency
(123.2 kHz). Therefore, if the intermediate resonator keeps
the same resonant frequency (134.2 kHz) during charging
and reading phase, the bit 0 (134.2 kHz) will pass through
a high-Q resonator, reaching larger amplitudes than the bit 1
(123.2 kHz), which will confront a non-resonant intermediate
coil. This difference in amplitudes, combined with having a
long decay time (due to a high Q), sets up a scenario favorable
to ISI, as when a bit 1 is sent after a bit 0, the non-resonant
1 will be overshadowed by the preceding resonant 0.
If we use a resistive ZL, the Q of the resonator for both
bits 0 and 1 will decrease. Therefore, while we will succeed
in reducing the decay time and avoiding ISI, we will further
impair the transmission conditions for bit 1. Consequently,
the RMS voltage received from bit 1, VS in Fig. 2, will be
very low, potentially preventing the reader from decoding the
signal. A similar effect will occur if we add a capacitive ZL
that significantly alters the resonator frequency, as it would
yield a comparable effect to removing the resonator. However,
if we use a capacitive ZL that shifts the resonator frequency
to a value near the middle of the 0 and 1 bits, the amplitude
imbalance between the bits is addressed, preventing one bit
from overshadowing the other.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. XX, NO. X, APRIL 2024 4
0 10 20 30
DIR-RX (cm)
0
20
40
60
D
TX-IR
(cm)
(a)
0 10 20 30
DIR-RX (cm)
0
20
40
60
D
TX-IR
(cm)
(b)
reading/decoding limits:
R = 200 Ω
R = 2 kΩ
R = 20 kΩ
charging limits
Fig. 6. Simulation results for the reading/decoding limits using different
resistances as ZL (Fig. 5). The charging limit indicates not enough power
received during the charging phase. (a) Reading/decoding limits due to ISI.
(b) Reading/decoding limits due to a too low sensed voltage (VS in Fig. 2).
0 10 20 30
DIR-RX (cm)
0
20
40
60
D
TX-IR
(cm)
C = 250 pF
C = 300 pF
C = 350 pF
(a)
0 10 20 30
DIR-RX (cm)
0
20
40
60
D
TX-IR
(cm)
C = 300 pF
C = 500 pF
C = 750 pF
(b)
charging limits
Fig. 7. Simulation results for the reading/decoding limits using different
capacitances as ZL (Fig. 5). The charging limit indicates not enough power
received during the charging phase. (a) Reading/decoding limits due to ISI.
(b) Reading/decoding limits due to a too low sensed voltage (VS in Fig. 2).
Figs. 6 (resistive ZL) and 7 (capacitive ZL) substantiate the
previous discussion through LTspice simulations, employing
the models for Tx and Rx introduced in [4], along with the
proposed resonator (Fig. 5). These plots depict the maximum
distances DTX-IR (reader-to-intermediate resonator) and DIR-RX
(intermediate resonator-to-tag) beyond which the tag cannot
be read. Figs. 6a and 7a indicate the limit from which the bit
error rate (BER) is not null due to the presence of ISI, while
Figs. 6b and 7b indicate the limit due to a low received signal
amplitude. As explained earlier, reading may also fail if the
tag is not fully energized during the charging phase, thus, this
charging limit was also superimposed in all the figures.
To analyze the curves plotted in Figs. 6 and 7, it is important
to note that the higher up to the right they are positioned, the
greater the distances between the coils can be to read the
tag. Conversely, the lower to the left they are, the shorter
the achievable read distance. Firstly, it is noteworthy that
merely reducing the bit decay time by introducing a resistive
element (Fig. 6) still results in strong limitations on reading
distances due to ISI (Fig. 6a). This is because the amplitude
of the resonant bit (0) remains significantly higher than that
of the non-resonant bit (1), overshadowing it. Moreover, as
the decay time is decreased (lower R in parallel, thus lower
Q), the reduction on the received bit amplitudes becomes more
pronounced, which also restricts the reading distance (Fig. 6b).
However, by modifying the resonance frequency, as illustrated
in Fig. 7, curves positioned higher to the top right are achieved,
corresponding to greater reading distances. As seen in Fig. 7,
the optimal value for C is 300 pF, which corresponds to setting
the intermediate coil resonance frequency near the middle of
the 0 and 1 bits. Both higher and lower values of C result in
more restrictive distance limits, as also shown in Fig. 7.
Therefore, as a result of the analysis, a standard 330 pF
capacitor was used as ZL, thus completing the design of the
proposed circuit presented in Fig. 5.
IV. MEASUREMENT RESULTS
The self-adaptive resonator, addressed in the previous sec-
tion (Fig. 5, with a capacitive ZL of 330 pF as designed), was
used to increase the reading distance of the low frequency
RFID link described in Section II. The measurement setup
is shown in Fig. 8, corresponding to one of the various
coil arrangements acquired. Fig. 9 plots the simulated limits
introduced in the previous section (continuous line) over-
lapped with the measurement results (solid dots), showing
good agreement and validating the analysis. The cause of the
reading failure (“Charging limit” or “reading/decoding” limit)
discussed in Section II was determined through measurements,
as represented by the colors indicated in the legend, which is
also consistent with the simulations.
To further validate the proposed circuit, it was measured
during operation while also sensing the magnetic field by a
sniffer antenna connected to an oscilloscope. These measure-
ment results are presented in Figs. 10 and 11 and described in
the remainder of this section. Fig. 10 shows the magnetic field,
the voltage VCS (at CS terminals) and the MOSFETs gate
voltage (VG). It shows the capacitor CL charging-up during
the 50 ms of the charging phase and, at the end of this phase,
when the envelope of the magnetic field has a falling edge, the
thyristor formed by Q1 and Q2 turns on the MOSFETs M1 and
M2 (gate voltage VG rises). The difference between VCS and
VG during the reading phase corresponds to the thyristor (Q1
& Q2) voltage drop. Fig. 11 compares the case in which the
intermediate resonator is connected only to a capacitor forming
a high-Q LC resonator at 134.2 kHz (light gray shadow); the
case in which the intermediate resonator is connected not only
Reader
resonator
⌀
⌀=26cm
=12cm
D
=20cm
IR-RX
(TX)
(IR)
Intermediate
D
=50cm
IR-RX
D =30cm
TX-IR
Tag
=2.7cm
⌀
(RX)
Fig. 8. Measurement setup. The maximum read distance corresponds to
DTX-IR = 60 cm and DIR-RX = 5 cm.
0 10 20 30 40
DIR-RX (cm)
0
20
40
60
D
TX-IR
(cm)
Sim. Charg. limit
Sim. reading/decoding limit
Exp. Charg. limit
Exp. reading/decoding limit
Fig. 9. Measurement results.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. XX, NO. X, APRIL 2024 5
−40 −20 0 20
time (ms)
−2
0
2
amplitude
Mag. Field (rel. units)
VG (V )
VCS (V )
Fig. 10. Circuit measurement using an auxiliary coil as magnetic field sniffer.
Nodes VG and VCS are labeled in Fig. 5.
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0
time (ms)
relative
magn.
field
amp.
high-Q LC res.
RLC resonator
this work
Fig. 11. Tag response for different intermediate coil: high-Q LC resonator,
RLC limited-Q resonator [4], and the detuned resonator used in this work.
to a capacitor to achieve resonance at 134.2 kHz, but also to a
parallel resistance of 53 kΩ to reduce its Q, forming the RLC
resonator proposed in [4] (strong gray shadow); and the case
in which the proposed self-adaptive circuit is used (only the
black envelope is shown for clarity purpose). With the first
setup (high-Q LC resonator) the tag is correctly energized (its
answer takes around 15 ms) but there is a strong ISI (not
showed in the image but the reader don’t returns lectures).
The second setup (RLC resonator) shows an answer which
takes significantly less than 15 ms proving that the tag was
not energized enough to complete its ID transmission. Finally,
the proposed self-adaptive resonator, has a 15 ms answer time,
without ISI (reader returns lectures), and also shows that the
resonance frequency during the reading phase is more near
the 123.2 kHz than the 134.2 kHz, contrary to the others two
cases (the amplitude ratios are opposite). This is consistent
with the aim of the proposed design that reduce the resonance
frequency to avoid the ISI during the reading phase.
V. CONCLUSION
This work contributes by proposing a novel resonator that
can dynamically adjust its response (either its Q or resonant
frequency) to enhance both power and data transmission
over the same inductive link. It is composed of a simple
batteryless circuit that harnesses the power generated by the
inductive link. This circuit can maintain a high-Q resonator for
efficient power transmission and self-adapt to enable proper
data transmission. Furthermore, we demonstrated that, due
to the FSK modulation, adjusting the resonance frequency,
rather than introducing dissipative elements like resistors to
decrease the Q, is a more effective strategy. The validity of
the proposed concept was confirmed through measurements
conducted on an actual RFID system extensively employed
for cattle identification, leading to a substantial improvement
in the reading distance (50% greater reading range compared
to using a classic fixed-Q intermediate resonator).
REFERENCES
[1] Q. Wang, W. Che, M. Mongiardo, and G. Monti, “Wireless power trans-
fer system with high misalignment tolerance for bio-medical implants,”
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 67,
no. 12, pp. 3023–3027, 2020.
[2] S. Pal and W.-H. Ki, “40.68 MHz digital on-off delay-compensated
active rectifier for WPT of biomedical applications,” IEEE Transactions
on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 3307–
3311, 2020.
[3] A. Celentano, C. Paolino, F. Pareschi, L. Callegaro, R. Rovatti, and
G. Setti, “Mutual inductance measurement in wireless power transfer
systems operating in the MHz range,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems II: Express Briefs, pp. 1–1, 2023.
[4] P. Pérez-Nicoli, A. Rodriguez-Esteva, and F. Silveira, “Bidirectional
analysis and design of RFID using an additional resonant coil to enhance
read range,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques,
vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 2357–2367, 2016.
[5] M. Kiani and M. Ghovanloo, “The circuit theory behind coupled-
mode magnetic resonance-based wireless power transmission,” IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 59, no. 9,
pp. 2065–2074, 2012.
[6] P. Pérez-Nicoli, F. Silveira, and M. Ghovanloo, Inductive Links for
Wireless Power Transfer: Fundamental Concepts for Designing High-
efficiency Wireless Power Transfer Links. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-3-030-65477-1
[7] C.-J. Chen, T.-H. Chu, C.-L. Lin, and Z.-C. Jou, “A study of loosely
coupled coils for wireless power transfer,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 536–540, 2010.
[8] Y. Zhao, H. Li, S. Naderiparizi, A. Parks, and J. R. Smith, “Low-
cost wireless power efficiency optimization of the NFC tag through
switchable receiver antenna,” Wireless Power Transfer, vol. 5, no. 2,
pp. 87–96, 2018.
[9] Y. Li, J. Hu, M. Liu, Y. Chen, K. W. Chan, Z. He, and R. Mai, “Re-
configurable intermediate resonant circuit based wpt system with load-
independent constant output current and voltage for charging battery,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 1988–1992,
2018.
[10] M. Schormans, D. Jiang, V. Valente, and A. Demosthenous, “Short-range
quality-factor modulation (squirm) for low power high speed inductive
data transfer,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular
Papers, vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 3254–3265, 2019.
[11] M. Kiani and M. Ghovanloo, “A 20-Mb/s pulse harmonic modulation
transceiver for wideband near-field data transmission,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 60, no. 7, pp.
382–386, 2013.
[12] F. Inanlou, M. Kiani, and M. Ghovanloo, “A 10.2 Mbps pulse harmonic
modulation based transceiver for implantable medical devices,” IEEE
journal of solid-state circuits, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1296–1306, 2011.
[13] B. Lee, M. Kiani, and M. Ghovanloo, “A triple-loop inductive power
transmission system for biomedical applications,” IEEE transactions on
biomedical circuits and systems, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 138–148, 2015.
[14] W. Redman-White, H. Kennedy, R. Bodnar, and T. Lee, “Adaptive
tuning of large-signal resonant circuits using phase-switched fractional
capacitance,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express
Briefs, vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 1072–1076, 2017.
[15] F. Kong, M. Ghovanloo, and G. D. Durgin, “An adaptive impedance
matching transmitter for a wireless intraoral tongue-controlled assistive
technology,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express
Briefs, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 240–244, 2020.
[16] J. Tian and A. Hu, “Stabilising the output voltage of wireless power
pickup through parallel tuned dc-voltage controlled variable capacitor,”
Electronics Letters, vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 758–759, 2016.
[17] P. P. Mercier and A. P. Chandrakasan, “Rapid wireless capacitor charging
using a multi-tapped inductively-coupled secondary coil,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 60, no. 9, pp.
2263–2272, 2013.
[18] Z. Dang, Y. Cao, and J. A. A. Qahouq, “Reconfigurable magnetic
resonance-coupled wireless power transfer system,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Electronics, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 6057–6069, 2015.
