Aalborg Universitet
Physics-Informed Surrogate Neural Network for Optimizing Diode-Based Interfaces in
Leadless Pacemaker Energy Harvesting
Hua, Qirui; Khazaee, Majid; Enkeshafi, Ali Asghar; Shen, Ming; Riahi, Sam; Rezaniakolaei,
Alireza
Published in:
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1109/TCSII.2025.3641701
Publication date:
2026
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript, peer reviewed version
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Hua, Q., Khazaee, M., Enkeshafi, A. A., Shen, M., Riahi, S., & Rezaniakolaei, A. (2026). Physics-Informed
Surrogate Neural Network for Optimizing Diode-Based Interfaces in Leadless Pacemaker Energy Harvesting.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, 73(2), 223-227.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSII.2025.3641701
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
- Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
- You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
- You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: June 04, 2026
© 2025 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be
obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing
this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for
resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this
work in other works.
1
Physics-Informed Surrogate Neural Network for Optimizing
Diode-Based Interfaces in Leadless Pacemaker Energy Harvesting
Qirui Hua, Majid Khazaee, Ali Asghar Enkeshafi, Ming Shen Senior Member, IEEE, Sam Riahi, and
Alireza Rezaniakolaei
Abstract—Efficient AC–DC interfaces are essential for low-
power energy harvesters to power intracardiac leadless pace-
makers (ICLPs) reliably. For the front-end circuitry, selecting a
diode that minimizes both conduction and leakage losses under
specified operating conditions is challenging, as the forward volt-
age drop and reverse leakage current cannot be simultaneously
reduced due to the device’s inherent physics. This brief presents
a machine learning framework that predicts the DC output
of diode-based AC-DC interfaces directly from specific voltage-
current (V-I) characteristic points of the diodes and descriptive
features of the excitation waveform. A physics-informed surrogate
model is trained on SPICE-simulated data of rectifiers driven by
experimentally captured cardiac harvester waveforms. Hardware
validation with printed-circuit rectifiers powered by the same
harvester source exhibits an average error of 0.03 V between
prediction and measurement, matching the performance observed
on the synthetic set and demonstrating robust generalization
to real-world applications. This data-driven approach offers
an instant, datasheet-only diode screening without circuit-level
evaluation and can be integrated into automated multi-objective
optimization flows for the design of low-power energy harvester
AC–DC interfaces.
Index Terms—AC–DC Interface, Diode Screening, Energy
Harvester, Machine Learning, Physics-Informed Neural Network
I. INTRODUCTION
THE rapid development of wearable, medical implants,
and distributed Internet of Things (IoT) devices has inten-
sified research in miniature energy harvesters. Piezoelectric en-
ergy harvesters (PEH) enable long-term power for intracardiac
leadless pacemakers (ICLPs), removing the need for battery-
replacement surgeries, as the heart provides kinetic energy
[1]. A contact-based impact piezoelectric method, validated
in animal trials, generates pulsating AC power in the tens
of microwatts range [2], with short pulse durations due to
shock-driven heart motion [3]. Efficient use of short-duration,
low-power energy for ICLPs requires a high-performance and
miniature AC–DC interface to rectify the harvested power and
deliver it to storage [4].
Most interfacing circuits rely on diodes as switches to real-
ize AC-DC conversion. However, diode non-idealities impose
significant penalties. The forward voltage drop dissipates a
proportion of the harvested power, reverse leakage current
Qirui Hua, and Sam Riahi are with the Department of Clinical
Medicine, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 9000 Denmark (e-mail:
qihu@es.aau.dk, sar@rn.dk).
Majid Khazaee, Ali Asghar Enkeshafi and Alireza Rezaniakolaei are
with AAU Energy, Aalborg University, Aalborg, 9220 Denmark (e-mail:
mad@energy.aau.dk, aaen@energy.aau.dk, alr@energy.aau.dk).
Ming Shen is with the Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg Univer-
sity, Aalborg, 9220 Denmark (e-mail: mish@es.aau.dk).
drains the storage element, and finite reverse-recovery time
adds loss at every polarity reversal [5]. Bridgeless or syn-
chronous interfaces promise higher efficiency, but at microwatt
levels, the control overhead often cancels the gain [6], [7].
Besides, the complex circuit architecture enlarges the overall
size and exceeds the limitations of ICLP systems, where all
components must be mounted in a cylinder measuring 6 mm
in diameter and 2 mm in height [2]. Consequently, traditional
diode-based structures remain practical choices for low-power
harvesters. Within such frameworks, selecting appropriate
diodes whose electrical properties carefully match specific
operating conditions is essential for maximizing efficiency and
utilizing the scarce harvested energy [8].
In steady state, the diode voltage-current (V-I) character-
istic can be approximated by the Shockley equation: ID =
IS eVD/nVT
− 1

[9], where ID and VD denote the diode
current and voltage, respectively. IS is the diode’s reverse-
bias saturation current, n is the ideality factor, and VT is the
thermal voltage. According to the equation, for a specified
forward conduction current, achieving a lower forward voltage
drop across the diode requires a larger saturation current IS,
which magnifies the leakage current under reverse bias, and
vice versa. This intrinsic trade-off complicates device selection
for rectifier optimization.
For a given operating condition defined by the harvester’s
properties, an optimal diode exists that minimizes the com-
bined forward conduction and reverse leakage losses, as low-
ering the forward voltage drop invariably increases the leakage
current and vice versa. In practice, however, identifying an
appropriate diode is far from straightforward, because rectifier
efficiency depends strongly on both device properties and
operating conditions [10], and data-sheet parameters alone
rarely predict in-circuit performance.
Information from the diode datasheet, including V-I char-
acteristic plots, cannot comprehensively evaluate the interplay
between forward and reverse losses. Since miniature harvesters
operating at low power density and low duty cycle can impose
different requirements on diode properties, how they can
match each other is hard to estimate [8]. Thus, designers
struggle to perform a fair, quantitative comparison of candidate
devices. In practice, engineers rely on experience to pick
diode candidates, followed by conducting iterative simulations
or prototype tests. Each screening loop relies on lengthy
transient simulations with recorded harvester waveforms or
laboratory measurements, for example, a 120-s trace sampled
at 5 kHz needs over 60 s to run, severely limiting rapid diode
evaluation. Furthermore, comparative simulations require vali-
dated SPICE models rather than simple datasheet information.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSII.2025.3641701
© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Aalborg Universitetsbibliotek. Downloaded on December 11,2025 at 11:51:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2
Piezoelectric
Harvester
Reference Diodes
Reference Diodes
Reference Diodes
SPICE Model Parameters
[Is, Rs, n, Cjo, Vj]
Excitation Settings
[f, amplitude, angle]
Model
Training
Diode V-I Characteristics + Signal Features Dataset
[Vf1, Vf2, Vf3, Ir1, Ir2, Ir3 | wp, σp
2, Ip, np]
AC Current Signals
Reference Diodes
Reference Diodes
Pseudo Diodes
Full-Wave Bridge Rectifier
Target Circuit Simulation
Data Augmentation Measure
SPICE Simulation
Charge Voltage Dataset
[VC]
Circuit
Components
Surrogate Model
Train Data
Diode Candidates Actual Signals
Train Target
Diode V-I Characteristics + Signal Features
[Vf1, Vf2, Vf3, Ir1, Ir2, Ir3 | wp, σp
2, Ip, np]
Emulate &
Replace
Apply
VC
Data Loss
+
λ×Physical Loss
=
Total Loss
Optimization
Physics-Informed
Neural Network
Experiment
Setup
Calibration
Predicted Charging
Performance
Validation
Diode
Optimization
VC, mea
VC, sim
Measure/Simulation
Coefficient
Ip Cp Rp
Equivalent Circuit Model
k =
Reduce time consumption and
eliminate the need for SPICE models.
Fig. 1. Overview of the PINN-assisted diode screening framework
For diodes without such models, simulation is not applicable
unless manual parameter extraction is performed [11], which
may introduce extra uncertainty and workload. Lacking a
direct analytical link between datasheet parameters and in-
circuit performance, this empirical workflow is slow and risks
overlooking better diodes.
To overcome these challenges, we are motivated by ma-
chine learning (ML) techniques that are enhancing low-power
electronics [12] and automated circuit synthesis [13], [14].
Datasheet-driven ML surrogates have achieved fast inductor
characterization for automated filter design [15], and physics-
informed neural networks (PINN) have been employed for
converter parameter extraction from measured waveforms [16].
In this paper, we introduce a data-driven framework to eval-
uate diode candidates for the AC-DC rectifier circuit through
an ML surrogate model that predicts conversion performance
directly from a set of diode V-I characteristic points and statis-
tical features of the power waveform. We implement the model
as a PINN [17], trained on synthetic data generated by SPICE
rectifier simulation with experimentally recorded cardiac PEH
power waveforms [2]. Furthermore, practical measurements
on rectifiers built with unseen diodes reveal only a minimal
average discrepancy between predicted and measured outputs,
which aligns well with the results on the synthetic data and
confirms robust generalization. By eliminating repeated proto-
type iterations and exhaustive simulations with SPICE models,
the proposed tool accelerates diode screening to maximize
energy-conversion efficiency for PEHs, which enables leadless
pacemakers and offers a possibility to realize automated multi-
objective optimization flows for interface design under given
operating conditions.
II. METHODS
A. Framework Overview
Recent advances in ML regression have produced surro-
gate models that can approximate circuit simulation results
with negligible computation time [14], [18]. This capability
enables a direct mapping from two readily available inputs:
(i) datasheet V-I characteristics points of the diode and (ii)
descriptive features of the energy harvester power waveform,
to the conversion performance metric. Fig. 1 summarizes
the workflow of the proposed framework, which comprises
synthetic data generation from SPICE simulation, surrogate
model construction, and experiment validation.
We demonstrate the framework on a full-wave bridge rec-
tifier that conditions the output of a miniature implantable
piezoelectric harvester [2]. Since application constraints limit
the overall size and preclude complex interfacing topologies,
the conversion efficiency largely depends on the choice of a
diode that offers the optimal trade-off between forward voltage
drop and reverse leakage.
The overall conversion performance of the AC-DC rectifier
is quantified by the maximum voltage VC on the output
storage capacitor at steady state, closely mimicking charging
a micro-battery in practical systems. This metric can reflect
the combined influence of the forward conduction loss during
charging intervals and the dissipation due to reverse leakage
during discharge intervals, as the input power equals the sum
of these losses at steady state.
B. Synthetic Dataset Generation
Training samples comprise 7200 input-output pairs. The in-
puts combine diode and waveform features. The output labels
are steady-state capacitor voltages VC, simulated from the
rectifier driven by experimental cardiac harvester waveforms.
We start from 75 commercial small-signal switching diode
SPICE models for their short reverse recovery time and
small size suited to low-power operation. This baseline is
augmented as 300 pseudo-diodes by independently perturbing
their original SPICE parameters (saturation current IS, ideality
factor n, series resistance RS, zero-bias junction capacitance
Cj0, and junction potential Vj [19]) within ±5 %, preserving
realistic correlations.
The variant current waveforms for simulation are produced
by an electrodynamic shaker that generates cardiac vibration
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSII.2025.3641701
© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Aalborg Universitetsbibliotek. Downloaded on December 11,2025 at 11:51:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
3
Shaker
Piezoelectric Harvester
Test PCB
Multimeter
Laser Sensor
13mm
6.7mm
27mm
Fig. 2. Experiment Setup
profiles and excites the PEH [2]. The PEH current pulses are
recorded as the simulation stimulus by measuring the short-
circuit current. To ensure the waveform diversity, 27 sets of
current waveforms are collected at shaker frequencies of 1.0,
1.2, and 1.4 Hz; input cardiac signal amplitudes of 600, 650,
and 700 mV; and tilt angles from 0◦
to 45◦
. From every
sample, four descriptive statistics are extracted, including the
mean width of pulses wp, the variance of pulse width σ2
p,
the mean amplitude of pulses Ip, and the mean number of
pulses per minute np, which are appended to the inputs as the
waveform features.
The AC-DC interface circuit under study is a full-wave
bridge comprising four identical diodes that charge a 10 µF
output capacitor in parallel with a 5 MΩ insulation resistor,
representing the self-leakage. The piezoelectric harvester is
modeled by its simplified equivalent model: a current source
shunted by its intrinsic capacitance Cp and internal resistance
Rp [20]. The complete SPICE netlist is assembled by placing
the pseudo-diode model as the rectifier components and ap-
plying one of the recorded waveforms as the source current.
A 120 s transient simulation is then executed to reach steady
state, and the maximum capacitor voltage VC within the final
10 s is sampled as the target label. Iterating over all diode and
waveform combinations yields the synthetic dataset.
C. PINN Surrogate Model
Within the proposed framework, PINN [17] acts as the
non-parametric surrogate model that maps the input features
to the steady-state capacitor voltage VC to evaluate diode
performance in the target conversion circuit. Prior to training,
all data are preprocessed by standardization.
The PINN adopts the deep neural network (DNN) archi-
tecture with a physics penalty based on power balance at
steady state. It uses a fully connected 5-layer network with
hidden widths of 64, 64, 32, 16, and 2 and activated by tanh,
with a dropout rate of 0.1 and a batch size of 400. Inputs are
standardized and the training is carried out over 700 epochs
using the Adam optimizer. These parameters are determined
via an exhaustive grid search where architectures with 3 to 6
hidden layers, widths from 2 to 256, and activation functions
of ReLU, Swish, and tanh are explored. In this framework, the
physical constraint is the condition for VC to reach the steady-
state balance point, at which the input power Pin is equal to
the total loss Ploss.
Given a predicted voltage on the capacitor VC, pred, the input
power can be computed by the capacitor voltage times the
input current, which can be given by:
Pin =
1
2
VC, pred Ip − Vpiezo/Rp
 1
60
wp np, (1)
where wp, np, and Ip are the waveform statistics included
in the input features. The piezoelectric source voltage is
estimated as Vpiezo = VC, pred + 2 Vfwd and thus Vpiezo/Rp
yields the internal loss current of the harvester. The forward
voltage drop Vfwd at current Ip is calculated by the Shockley
equation (1), whose coefficients are fitted from the input V-I
characteristic pairs of the target diode.
Furthermore, the loss part consists of the diode reverse
leakage and capacitor self-discharge:
Ploss = Ileak VC, pred +
V 2
C, pred
RC
, (2)
where RC is the insulation resistance of the capacitor. The cur-
rent leakage Ileak is approximated by an empirical exponential
model fitted to the input diode V-I features.
The composite loss for model training is given by:
L = Ldata + λ Lphys
=
1
N
N
X
i=1
h
VC, pred − VC, true
2
+λ Pin − Ploss
i
,
(3)
where the first term is the mean squared error (MSE) data loss,
and the second is the mean absolute error (MAE) for physical
loss, weighted by a scalar coefficient λ.
D. Calibration
To compensate the systematic bias between simulated and
measured peak capacitor voltages for more accurate prediction,
we compute a scalar calibration factor k = V C, mea/V C, sim
from an independent set of calibration diodes and scale all
predictions as VC, calib = kVC, pred, where V C, mea and V C, sim
are the average measured and simulated charge voltages,
respectively. Since systematic errors may vary with operating
conditions, calibration factors should be determined separately
for each excitation or measurement setup.
III. EXPERIMENT SETUP
A B&K V406 shaker mimics cardiac motion to excite
the PEH, producing the current waveforms for synthetic data
generation and for driving practical circuits, with laser sensing
ensuring accurate motion as presented in Fig. 2. Details on
the PEH and motion simulation are available in [2]. For
experimental validation, 13 test diodes (10 without validated
SPICE models and cannot be simulated) and 6 calibration
diodes are mounted on a printed circuit board (PCB).
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSII.2025.3641701
© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Aalborg Universitetsbibliotek. Downloaded on December 11,2025 at 11:51:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
4
42.7 51.4
PMEG3001EEF
RB751CS40
1PS70SB40
BAW56S
BAV756S
RB520CS30L
Diodes
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
1
3
5
6
4
Simulation Results
42.7 51.4
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
1
3
4
6
5
PINN Prediction
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Maximum
charge
voltage
(V)
Peak waveform current of PEH output (uA)
Fig. 3. Heat map and diode relative rankings of PINN prediction and
simulation (numbers indicate diode rankings)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Simulation Voltage (V)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Prediction
Voltage
(V)
(a)
PINN Predictions
Ideal Fit
0.1 0.0 0.1
Prediction Error (V)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Frequency
(b)
95% CI
[-0.115, 0.049] V
Zero Error
0.2 0.4 0.6
Measured Voltage (V)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Prediction
Voltage
(V)
(c)
PINN Predictions
Ideal Fit
0.025 0.000 0.025 0.050
Prediction Error (V)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency
(d)
95% CI
[-0.023, 0.061] V
Zero Error
Fig. 4. (a) PINN prediction vs simulation voltage, (b) PINN prediction vs
simulation error histogram, (c) PINN prediction vs measurement voltage, (d)
PINN prediction vs measurement error histogram
IV. RESULTS
The proposed framework is coded in Python, circuit simu-
lations are performed with PySpice, and the PINN surrogate
model is implemented in TensorFlow. The test set comprises
900 samples simulated from the original diodes under a 650
mV, 1.2 Hz stimulus, while the training set consists of 7200
samples (5% as a validation set) from pseudo-diodes with any
other amplitude–frequency combinations. The PINN achieves
notable computational speed, requiring around 270 s for model
training and 47.5 ms for single sample prediction compared to
60-70 s for SPICE simulation (120 s trace at 5 kHz). Further-
more, regression accuracy is evaluated by mean absolute error
(MAE), root mean squared error (RMSE), Pearson correlation
coefficient ρ, and p-value from paired t-tests.
A. Prediction vs Simulation
Fig. 3 compares the peak capacitor voltages VC predicted
by the PINN model with their simulation values for six
2
1
0
1
2
PEH
Waveform
current
(mA)
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Time (s)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Charge
Voltage
V
c
(V)
Vc PMEG3001EEF
Vc BAW56W
Vc RB530S40
PEH current (mA)
Fig. 5. Comparison of diode conversion performance
representative diodes under three excitation levels. Each heat
map cell is annotated with the diode performance ranking
under the corresponding operating conditions. Although the
diode ranking varies with excitation conditions, the PINN can
reproduce the correct order in almost every case. The few
mismatches occur mainly when the simulated voltages differ
by less than 50 mV.
The performance of the PINN surrogate is presented in
Fig. 4 (a), which plots the predicted versus simulated VC for
the entire test set. The points tightly follow the unity-slope
line, indicating consistent regression within the test range. As
reported in Table I, the model attains a mean absolute error
of 0.047 V and a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.989 on
the test data. Despite slightly greater dispersion in predicting
lower voltages, PINN can estimate the diode performance
from its characteristics and features of the input waveform
with sufficient accuracy to replace circuit-level simulation for
component evaluation.
Fig. 5 illustrates the simulation charged voltage over time
of the optimal diode chosen by the proposed framework com-
pared with two representative diodes. The appropriate diode
contributes to boosting the charged voltage, demonstrating the
benefit of the diode selection on the conversion efficiency.
B. Prediction vs Measurements
To assess generalization, PINN predictions are validated
against measurements from 13 PCB rectifiers using unseen
commercial diodes and harvester waveforms not present dur-
ing model training, replicating real-world applications. Fig.
4 (b) plots the predicted VC after calibration (k = 1.07
derived from calibration) versus the measured voltages. The
plot demonstrates that the PINN model achieves similar per-
formance on both the measurement and synthetic sets. The
measurement-prediction points are clustered around the ideal
fit line, yielding a mean absolute error of 0.03 V and a Pearson
coefficient of 0.974. These practical results confirm that the
PINN model generalizes well to unseen diodes and excitation
profiles and maintains high accuracy.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSII.2025.3641701
© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Aalborg Universitetsbibliotek. Downloaded on December 11,2025 at 11:51:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
5
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF ML REGRESSION MODELS.
Data Metrics Poly DNN XGBoost PINN
Simulation
MAE 0.084 0.059 0.045 0.047
RMSE 0.143 0.081 0.059 0.060
ρ 0.908 0.979 0.990 0.989
Paired t-test 6.2e-6 4.0e-15 3.9e-23 7.6e-20
Measurement
MAE 0.082 0.045 0.036 0.030
RMSE 0.114 0.053 0.043 0.035
ρ 0.588 0.931 0.967 0.974
Paired t-test 5.0e-1 9.6e-3 9.6e-3 5.1e-3
C. Comparison of Regression Models
Table I contrasts four surrogate models across the simulated
and measurement data, polynomial regression baseline, DNN,
XGBoost [21] and PINN. In the simulation test, XGBoost
and PINN achieve comparable accuracy, but in the real mea-
surement test, PINN demonstrates superior generalization, out-
performing XGBoost and other two models. The polynomial
baseline exhibits poor generalization in the measurement test,
highlighting the necessity of advanced ML methods for this
nonlinear prediction task. Critically, while purely data-driven
models suffer a noticeable performance degradation on real
test data, the physical constraint based on energy balance
allows the PINN model to prevent overfitting and extrapo-
late robustly to unseen diodes and waveforms, validating its
effectiveness for SPICE surrogate approximations.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In the proposed framework, the PINN delivers diode evalu-
ations in milliseconds with direct datasheet information, even
when no validated SPICE model exists, and replaces iterative
simulations or prototyping for optimizing diode selection.
Although trained solely on synthetic data, it retains high
accuracy on real-world test cases thanks to the embedded
physics penalty. Such accuracy and robustness enable rapid
component screening and fit naturally into automated design
loops, including optimization or design-space exploration.
However, the present study employs a lightweight network
and a dataset restricted to a narrow set of waveforms, diode
types, and a single circuit topology. Future work will explore
richer models, enlarge the validation, extend the PINN to
multi-stage topologies by investigating physics constraints at
specific nodes, and integrate the surrogate into multi-objective
optimization flows [22], [23].
In summary, the proposed framework enables fast and
accurate estimation of diode performance using datasheet-level
inputs, paving the way for future circuit design optimization
and automation. This capability supports low-power, ultra-low-
frequency PEHs for body energy harvesting by identifying the
optimal diode and accelerating the design of miniaturized rec-
tifier stages. This study offers a concrete path toward realizing
intracardiac leadless pacemakers and brings the vision of fully
self-powered cardiac devices closer to reality.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Hasani et al., “Epicardial heart motion measurement by implanting
motion sensor,” in 2025 IEEE Medical Measurements & Applications
(MeMeA), 2025, pp. 1–5.
[2] M. Khazaee et al., “Contact-based impact energy harvesting from the
ultralow frequency intracardiac kinetic energy,” ACS Energy Letters,
vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 2944–2952, 2024.
[3] ——, “Harnessing cardiac power: heart kinetic motion analysis for
energy harvesters,” Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, vol. 95,
p. 106421, 2024.
[4] B. Zhang et al., “A review of nonlinear piezoelectric energy harvesting
interface circuits in discrete components,” Applied Mathematics and
Mechanics, vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 1001–1026, 2022.
[5] D. W. Hart and D. W. Hart, Power electronics. McGraw-Hill New
York, 2011, vol. 166.
[6] Q. Zuo et al., “An ultra-efficient and compact flipping-input synchro-
nized switch harvesting on inductor and capacitors interface circuit for
piezoelectric energy harvesting,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
Systems II: Express Briefs, 2024.
[7] Q. Lian, P. Han, and N. Mei, “A review of converter circuits for ambient
micro energy harvesting,” Micromachines, vol. 13, no. 12, p. 2222, 2022.
[8] K. Nadaud, G. Poulin-Vittrant, and D. Alquier, “Influence of topology
and diode characteristics of ac-dc converters for low power piezoelectric
energy harvesting,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 330, p.
112901, 2021.
[9] W. Shockley, “The theory of p-n junctions in semiconductors and p-n
junction transistors,” Bell system technical journal, vol. 28, no. 3, pp.
435–489, 1949.
[10] A. Elmai et al., “A new configuration of a microstrip rf-dc rectifier for
rf energy harvesting applications,” in EPJ Web of Conferences, vol. 326.
EDP Sciences, 2025, p. 01002.
[11] D. Ren et al., “Improvement of the spice model of diode based on
measurement and nonlinear fitting random optimization algorithm,”
Electronics, vol. 11, no. 21, p. 3461, 2022.
[12] W. Dong et al., “Stretchable self-powered teng sensor array for human
robot interaction based on conductive ionic gels and lstm neural net-
work,” IEEE Sensors Journal, 2024.
[13] H. T. Nguyen and A. F. Peterson, “Machine learning for automating
millimeter-wave directional coupler designs,” IEEE Transactions on
Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 549–553,
2021.
[14] Y. Zhang, Y. Xu, and F. Blaabjerg, “Surrogate models for power
electronic systems applying machine learning techniques,” in Control of
Power Electronic Converters and Systems: Volume 4. Elsevier, 2024,
pp. 333–352.
[15] T. Guillod, P. Papamanolis, and J. W. Kolar, “Artificial neural network
(ann) based fast and accurate inductor modeling and design,” IEEE Open
Journal of Power Electronics, vol. 1, pp. 284–299, 2020.
[16] S. Zhao et al., “Parameter estimation of power electronic converters
with physics-informed machine learning,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Electronics, vol. 37, no. 10, pp. 11 567–11 578, 2022.
[17] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Physics-informed
neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and
inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations,”
Journal of Computational physics, vol. 378, pp. 686–707, 2019.
[18] Z. Tang et al., “Semi-supervised transfer learning framework for aging-
aware library characterization,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 1156–1160, 2023.
[19] N. Arora, “Spice diode and mosfet models and their parameters,” in
MOSFET Models for VLSI Circuit Simulation: Theory and Practice.
Springer, 1993, pp. 536–562.
[20] J. Dicken et al., “Power-extraction circuits for piezoelectric energy
harvesters in miniature and low-power applications,” IEEE Transactions
on power electronics, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 4514–4529, 2012.
[21] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system,”
in Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on
knowledge discovery and data mining, 2016, pp. 785–794.
[22] G. Rodrigues et al., “Maximizing energy harvesting in a miniaturized
implant with an integrated coil receiver,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 3762–3766, 2023.
[23] V. Srikanth et al., “Machine learning-based analogue circuit de-
sign for stage categorization and evolutionary optimization,” in 2024
Second International Conference Computational and Characterization
Techniques in Engineering & Sciences (IC3TES). IEEE, 2024, pp.
1–6.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSII.2025.3641701
© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Aalborg Universitetsbibliotek. Downloaded on December 11,2025 at 11:51:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
