IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems
ISSN 2569-2925, Vol. 2023, No. 4, pp. 32–57. DOI:10.46586/tches.v2023.i4.32-57
BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator
for BGV Fully Homomorphic Encryption
Robin Geelen1∗
, Michiel Van Beirendonck1∗
, Hilder V. L. Pereira1
, Brian
Huffman2
, Tynan McAuley3
, Ben Selfridge2
, Daniel Wagner2
, Georgios
Dimou3
, Ingrid Verbauwhede1
, Frederik Vercauteren1
and David W. Archer2
1
COSIC KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
{firstname.lastname}@esat.kuleuven.be
2
Galois, Inc., Portland, OR, USA
huffman@galois.com
benselfridge@galois.com
dmwit@galois.com
dwa@galois.com
3
Niobium Microsystems, Portland, OR, USA
{firstname}@niobiummicrosystems.com
Abstract. Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) allows for secure computation on
encrypted data. Unfortunately, huge memory size, computational cost and bandwidth
requirements limit its practicality. We present BASALISC, an architecture family
of hardware accelerators that aims to substantially accelerate FHE computations in
the cloud. BASALISC is the first to implement the BGV scheme with fully-packed
bootstrapping – the noise removal capability necessary for arbitrary-depth computa-
tion. It supports a customized version of bootstrapping that can be instantiated with
hardware multipliers optimized for area and power.
BASALISC is a three-abstraction-layer RISC architecture, designed for a 1 GHz ASIC
implementation and underway toward 150mm2
die tape-out in a 12nm GF process.
BASALISC’s four-layer memory hierarchy includes a two-dimensional conflict-free
inner memory layer that enables 32 Tb/s radix-256 NTT computations without
pipeline stalls. Its conflict-resolution permutation hardware is generalized and re-used
to compute BGV automorphisms without throughput penalty. BASALISC also has a
custom multiply-accumulate unit to accelerate BGV key switching.
The BASALISC toolchain comprises a custom compiler and a joint performance and
correctness simulator. To evaluate BASALISC, we study its physical realizability,
emulate and formally verify its core functional units, and we study its performance
on a set of benchmarks. Simulation results show a speedup of more than 5,000× over
HElib – a popular software FHE library.
Keywords: Fully homomorphic encryption · Brakerski-Gentry-Vaikuntanathan ·
Hardware accelerator · Application-specific integrated circuit
1 Motivation
Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) [RAD+
78,Gen09,ACC+
18] offers the promise of
confidentiality-preserving computation over sensitive data in a variety of theoretical and
practical applications, ranging from new cryptographic primitives to machine learning as
a service. Unfortunately, the utility of FHE is severely limited by its high memory size,
∗R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck contributed equally to this research.
Licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0.
Received: 2023-04-15 Accepted: 2023-06-15 Published: 2023-08-31
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 33
memory bandwidth and high computational overhead. The typical result - computation that
runs many orders of magnitude slower than insecure computation - prevents broad adoption.
Although new schemes have markedly improved FHE performance [BGV14, CGGI20,
BIP+
22, CKKS17], and highly optimized FHE libraries [SEA22, HS14, Lat22, CJL+
20,
PRR17] are now available, FHE still remains orders of magnitude beyond acceptable
performance limits for most potential applications.
In other computational domains where performance on general purpose processors is
problematic, innovation has turned to purpose-built accelerators, tuned to exploit domain-
specific characteristics of computation. DSP accelerators, arguably starting with the
Texas Instruments TMS320 DSP family [LFS87] in 1983, are perhaps the first example of
this approach. More recently, Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) have become popular
for accelerating video stream processing and hash function computation. Our FHE
accelerator, BASALISC, follows this approach in pursuit of bringing the throughput of
FHE computation within an order of magnitude relative to cleartext computation [Ron20].
Contributions. We summarize the contributions of BASALISC as follows:
• BASALISC accelerates BGV arithmetic for a large range of parameters. In contrast to
prior accelerators, BASALISC is the first to support and implement fully-packed BGV
bootstrapping directly in hardware to enable unlimited-depth FHE computations. We
propose a novel version of bootstrapping that is compatible with NTT-friendly primes.
In contrast to prior work, BASALISC instantiates its multipliers exclusively to these
NTT-friendly primes, which saves 46% logic area and 40% power consumption.
• BASALISC implements a massively parallel radix-256 NTT architecture, using a
conflict-free layout, a corresponding layout permutation unit, and a twiddle factor
generator. These units are deeply interleaved with the on-chip memory and provide
a massive 32 Tb/s NTT throughput. In addition, we show that one can efficiently
generalize the required layout permutation unit to compute BGV automorphisms
without additional silicon area.
• BASALISC is a comprehensive RISC-like architecture with a three-level Instruction
Set Architecture (ISA) that allows for reasoning at diverse levels of executive ab-
straction. It adopts a four-level memory hierarchy purpose-built to address common
FHE memory bottlenecks, including a mid-level 64 MB on-chip Ciphertext Buffer
(CTB). At the lowest level, a massively parallel multiply-accumulate unit with in-
tegrated 16-entry register file allows accelerating tight BGV key switching loops,
asynchronously and independently of the CTB.
• BASALISC is placed and routed with 150mm2
die size and 1 GHz operational
frequency in a 12nm low-power Global Foundries process. Critical hardware logic is
emulated and formally verified for correctness. BASALISC is evaluated on a set of
micro- and macro-benchmarks, showing more than 5,000× speedup over HElib.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Fully Homomorphic Encryption
Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) provides a simple use model to securely outsource
computation on sensitive data to a third party. Informally, the FHE model enables a
user to encrypt their data m into a ciphertext c = Enc(m), then send it to a third party,
who can compute on c. The third party produces another ciphertext c0
encrypting f(m)
for some desired function f. This is done by representing the function in terms of the
34 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
operations provided by the scheme, typically addition and multiplication, and computing
these operations on the encrypted data. We say that f was computed homomorphically.
In FHE, the third party receives only ciphertexts and the public key, but never the
secret key that allows decryption. As a result, the sensitive inputs are protected under
the security of the encryption scheme. Because the result of the computation remains
encrypted, the output also remains unknown to the third party: only the holder of the
secret key can decrypt and access it. This scenario is illustrated in Figure 1.
To achieve security, the ciphertexts of all FHE schemes are noisy. This noise is added
to the input data during encryption and removed during decryption. Each homomorphic
operation, such as an addition or a multiplication, increases the noise in the resulting
ciphertext. Decryption can still recover the correct result, provided that the noise is small
enough. Therefore, we can compute only a limited number of homomorphic operations
before we reach the limit of decryption failure.
Because multiplications increase ciphertext noise much more than additions, we usually
model noise growth by the number of sequential multiplications. Computing the product
QL
i=1 mi requires a multiplicative depth of dlog2(L)e. This is accomplished by writing the
product in a tree structure, with each leaf node representing one of the factors. Note that
FHE suffers from a general trade-off between computational cost and tolerating a larger L:
one can increase the encryption parameters as to obtain more multiplicative depth, but in
doing so, the homomorphic operations become slower and the size of ciphertexts larger.
m
f(m)
sk, pk
pk
Figure 1: FHE used in a typical
commercial application.
To support the computation of functions regardless
of their multiplicative depth, FHE uses bootstrapping.
This operation reduces noise by decrypting a ciphertext
homomorphically. Unfortunately, bootstrapping is very
expensive, so its use is often minimized. There are sev-
eral techniques in the FHE literature to slow down the
noise growth, and thus delay bootstrapping. This work
employs key switching and modulus switching [BGV14].
In practice, bootstrapping and key switching tend to
heavily dominate computation and data movement
costs of an application: in a simple 1,024-point, 10-
feature logistic regression, we see that these tasks account for over 95% of the computational
effort and the vast majority of data movement.
In summary, the implementation challenges of FHE are the high complexity of compu-
tation, the large ciphertext expansion ratio (large polynomials with integer coefficients of a
1000 bits or more), and the proportion of effort needed in bootstrapping (or delaying it) in
sufficiently complex programs. In the remainder of this paper, we examine the magnitude
of these challenges and how they impact the design of our FHE accelerator.
2.2 The BGV Cryptosystem
BASALISC targets the homomorphic encryption scheme BGV [BGV14]. Plaintexts and
ciphertexts are represented by elements in the ring R = Z[X]/(XN
+ 1) with N a power
of 2. Those elements are thus polynomials reduced modulo XN
+1, which is implicit in our
notation. BGV guarantees finite data structures by additionally reducing the coefficients:
the plaintext space is computed modulo t (denoted Rt), and the ciphertext space is a pair
of elements modulo q (denoted R2
q). Reduction modulo m (with m = t or q) is explicitly
denoted by [·]m and is done symmetrically around 0 (i.e., in the set [−m/2, m/2) ∩ Z).
As with traditional ciphers, BGV has encryption and decryption procedures to move
between the plaintext space and the ciphertext space. These operations are never executed
by the server that performs the outsourced computation, and are therefore not implemented
by BASALISC. However, the ciphertext format remains an important element of the BGV
scheme and is essential to explain the homomorphic operations. A BGV ciphertext
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 35
(c0, c1) ∈ R2
q is said to encrypt plaintext m ∈ Rt under secret key s (which has small
coefficients) if
c0 + c1 · s = m + te (mod q) (1)
for some element e that also has small coefficients. The term e is called the noise, and it
determines if decryption returns the correct plaintext: if e has coefficients roughly less
than q/2t, then m + te does not overflow modulo q. We can therefore recover the plaintext
uniquely as m = [[c0 + c1 · s]q]t.
2.2.1 Basic Homomorphic Operations
Smart and Vercauteren [SV14] observed that for t = pr
with p an odd prime, the plaintext
space Rt is equivalent to Z`
t for some ` that divides N. This technique - referred to as
packing - allows us to encode ` numbers into one plaintext simultaneously. Addition and
multiplication over tuples in Z`
t are then performed entry-wise. As a result, one ciphertext
can encrypt and operate on an entire tuple, which leads to significant performance benefits
and memory reductions in practice.
When BGV is used in conjunction with packing, one can define three basic homomorphic
operations. Let (c0, c1) and (c0
0, c0
1) be two distinct ciphertexts that encrypt respectively
the tuples (m1, ..., m`) and (m0
1, ..., m0
`), then we can perform the following operations:
• Addition: compute ctadd = ([c0 + c0
0]q, [c1 + c0
1]q). The underlying plaintext of
ctadd is then (m1 + m0
1, ..., m` + m0
`).
• Multiplication: compute ctmul = ([c0 · c0
0]q, [c0 · c0
1 + c1 · c0
0]q, [c1 · c0
1]q). Observe
that the resulting ciphertext consists of three ring elements, but this can be reduced
back to two with a post-processing step known as key switching. The underlying
plaintext of ctmul is then (m1 · m0
1, ..., m` · m0
`).
• Permutation: compute ctper = (φk(c0), φk(c1)). The map φk (called automor-
phism) is parameterized by an odd integer k and defined as φk : c(X) 7→ c(Xk
).
Gentry et al. [GHS12a] have shown that automorphisms induce a permutation on
the elements of the encoded tuple. The underlying plaintext of ctper is therefore a
permutation of (m1, ..., m`). Although the resulting ciphertext has only two elements,
we still need post-processing by means of key switching.
The validity of these three operations can be verified by observing their effect on Equation 1.
We refer to Zucca [Zuc18] for more details, including an analysis of the noise growth of
each homomorphic operation.
2.2.2 Auxiliary Homomorphic Operations
Basic homomorphic operations lead to ciphertext expansion and noise growth. A product
ciphertext, for example, consists of three elements and is encrypted under (s, s2
) instead of s.
Moreover, the noise term is equal to te · e0
, where e and e0
are the noise terms of the input
ciphertexts. A similar problem occurs during permutation, where the automorphism φk
not only acts on the ciphertext and plaintext, but also on the secret key. The resulting
ciphertext will therefore be encrypted under φk(s) instead of s.
To prevent ciphertext expansion, maintain the same encryption key for each ciphertext,
and slow down noise growth, BGV defines two auxiliary procedures:
• Modulus switching: given a ciphertext (c0, c1) ∈ R2
q and a modulus q0
, compute a
new ciphertext (c0
0, c0
1) ∈ R2
q0 that decrypts with respect to q0
instead of q. Modulus
switching has the positive side effect of reducing the noise by a factor of q0
/q.
36 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
• Key switching: given a key switching matrix (
−
→
k0,
−
→
k1) and either a product ci-
phertext (c0, c1, c2) ∈ R3
q or a permuted ciphertext (c0, c1) ∈ R2
q, compute a new
ciphertext (c0
0, c0
1) ∈ R2
q that decrypts directly under the secret key s using Equa-
tion 1. Thus key switching brings the ciphertext back to its original format.
Modulus switching is typically done just before multiplication in order to reduce the noise
to its minimum level. Key switching is performed after multiplication or permutation to
keep the ciphertext format consistent. We again refer to Zucca [Zuc18] for more details,
including an analysis of the noise growth of both operations.
2.2.3 Bootstrapping
When the entire noise budget of a ciphertext is consumed (equivalently, when the modulus
is depleted to its minimum value by successive modulus switchings), further homomorphic
operations are no longer immediately possible. We can overcome this problem by means of a
bootstrapping procedure that reduces the noise back to a lower level [Gen09]. Bootstrapping
refreshes a ciphertext by running decryption homomorphically. One evaluates an adapted
version of Equation 1, followed by a homomorphic rounding procedure. The state-of-the-art
bootstrapping technique for BGV is implemented in the HElib software library [HS21].
3 Data Representation and Algorithms
Basic homomorphic operations can be implemented via arithmetic in Rq, i.e., based on
polynomial addition, multiplication and automorphism. In order to obtain efficient arith-
metic in Rq, two common tricks have been developed [GHS12b], and BASALISC employs
them as well. Firstly, Section 3.1 explains how computations modulo q can be split into
many smaller moduli qi, based on the Chinese Remainder Theorem (CRT). This data
representation is called a Residue Number System (RNS). Secondly, Section 3.2 explains
conversion between the polynomial and frequency domain via the Number-Theoretic Trans-
form (NTT), which is necessary for efficient multiplication and automorphism. Similarly
to RNS, the NTT can also be interpreted in terms of the Chinese Remainder Theorem.
Hence, the combination of using RNS for fast arithmetic modulo q and the NTT for fast
polynomial arithmetic modulo XN
+ 1, is referred to as Double-CRT representation.
3.1 Residue Number System
Suppose that the ciphertext modulus is given by the product q = q1 · . . . · qk of pairwise
coprime numbers. Then computations in Rq can be reduced to simultaneous computations
in the smaller rings Rqi
by applying the Chinese Remainder Theorem. This data repre-
sentation is called a Residue Number System (RNS), and brings an asymptotic speedup
factor of O(k). Moreover, it simplifies architecture design, because the size of each qi is
much smaller than q (a typical value is 32 bits for qi versus more than 1000 bits for q).
3.2 Number-Theoretic Transform
In order to perform efficient polynomial multiplication in time O(N log(N)), we resort to
the Number-Theoretic Transform (NTT). The NTT is a generalization of the Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) to finite fields, and allows us to use exact integer arithmetic, preventing
round-off errors typical of real-valued FFT computations. Similar to the FFT, the NTT
can be computed with the Cooley-Tukey algorithm that recursively re-expresses an NTT
of size N = N1N2 as N2 inner NTTs of size N1, followed by N1 outer NTTs of size N2.
Before the outer NTT, each output of the inner NTT is multiplied by a twiddle factor:
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 37
X[k1+N1k2] =
N2−1
X
n2=0
N1−1
X
n1=0
x[N2n1+n2]ωn1k1
N1
!
ωn2k1
N ωn2k2
N2
. (2)
By choosing N1 = 2 and N2 = N/2 at each recursive decomposition or vice-versa, the
well-known radix-two Decimation-In-Time (DIT) and Decimation-In-Frequency (DIF)
algorithms are obtained, respectively.
The NTT can be used directly for fast cyclic convolutions (polynomial multiplication
modulo XN
− 1). However, BGV performs polynomial multiplication modulo XN
+ 1,
requiring negacyclic convolutions. Those can still be implemented with a regular NTT, but
require an additional pre-multiplication of the input polynomials and post-multiplication
of the output polynomial by an extra set of twiddle factors [AHU74].
3.3 Implemented Algorithms and Parameter Sets
BASALISC accelerates the five basic and auxiliary homomorphic operations. All of these
can be built from three building blocks on vector operands: entry-wise addition and
multiplication; entry permutation; and the NTT. For example, addition is coefficient-wise
and handled directly in either the polynomial or frequency domain. On the other hand,
multiplication and automorphism can only be handled in the frequency domain, respectively
via entry-wise multiplication and entry permutation. Modulus and key switching are more
complicated, and they need conversion between the polynomial and frequency domain via
the NTT.
3.3.1 Supported Parameter Sets
As opposed to software implementations, hardware accelerators gain throughput benefits
by supporting a limited range of commonly used parameters. We start with the realization
that at least 128-bit security must be supported if BASALISC is to be interesting to
real-world users. Based on this observation, we choose a parameter range that allows for
an efficient implementation, while still retaining sufficient freedom for application design.
A typical range for the ring dimension N, offering sufficient flexibility, is between 214
and
216
. BASALISC settles on a maximum value of N = 216
, which allows ciphertext moduli
up to q = 21782
at 128-bit security level. This gives a large number of multiplicative levels,
even at a high-precision plaintext space (e.g., 31 levels at plaintext modulus t = 1273
without bootstrapping; with bootstrapping, we get an arbitrary number of levels).
Table 1 shows the full parameter range supported by BASALISC and an example
parameter set for illustration. The largest ciphertext modulus that appears during the basic
homomorphic operations is denoted by Q; during key switching, however, the modulus is
temporarily extended to QP. Concretely, our largest supported modulus is QP ≈ 21782
.
Table 1: BASALISC parameter ranges and examples.
Parameter Range Example
Security parameter N/A 128 bits
Ring dimension N 512 − 65536 65536
Plaintext modulus t > 2 1273
Ciphertext packing ` 2 − 65536 64 slots
Max log2(QP) for key switching 20 − 1782 1782 bits
Max log2(Q) for ciphertext 20 − 1782 1263 bits
Max multiplicative depth L N/A 31
38 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
3.3.2 Algorithmic Details
Currently, the term BGV refers to a family of related algorithms that are derived from the
original scheme [BGV14]. One assumption of the original scheme is that the factors of
the ciphertext modulus satisfy qi = 1 (mod t). This can be interpreted as a log2(t)-bit
restriction on qi, which limits the freedom in the selection of the ciphertext modulus and
poses a lower bound on the factors of the RNS chain. HElib implements an improved
variant of the BGV scheme that does not require this restriction [HS20]. However, this
improved version needs to keep track of a correction factor κ ∈ Z∗
t and encrypts κ · m
instead of m. Each ciphertext is tagged with such a correction factor, which is removed
upon decryption by multiplying with κ−1
. BASALISC implements the HElib version of
BGV. Correction factor management is done by our compiler Artemidorus (see Section 8).
Due to algebraic constraints, the NTT is only defined for prime moduli of the shape
qi = 1 (mod 2N). These special moduli are referred to as NTT-friendly primes. In
the case of our ring dimension N = 216
, this puts a lower bound of 17 bits on the size
of qi. Coupled with the requirement to have a sufficient amount of moduli available to
reach log2(QP) = 1782 bits, a simple analysis can show that we need qi of at least 26
bits. In practice, however, BASALISC employs 32-bit moduli, because it gives a better
utilization for the on-chip memory buffer and simplified interaction with the external
memory. Furthermore, both 26-bit and 32-bit moduli result in the same complement of
arithmetic units within our silicon area budget. For the example parameter set of Table 1,
Q is a product of 42 primes and P is a product of 14 additional primes.
4 NTT-Friendly Bootstrapping
Since the number-theoretic transform is only defined for NTT-friendly primes, we restrict
BASALISC’s hardware multipliers to these NTT-friendly primes (see Section 7.4 for the
motivation of this design choice). However, all current bootstrapping implementations
switch to a specially-shaped modulus [HS21,CH18], either q = pe
+ 1 or q = pe
, which is
not an NTT-friendly prime in general. For software implementations, this is not an issue,
because CPUs provide a general-purpose instruction set. However, with our specialized
hardware multipliers, bootstrapping cannot be implemented directly.
We propose a generalized version of bootstrapping that works with NTT-friendly
primes exclusively, and can still be evaluated with the same computational cost as regular
bootstrapping. It relies on a simplified decryption lemma that was proposed earlier [GV22].
Our contribution is to implement this lemma in BASALISC, which requires non-trivial
RNS operations as explained in the remainder of this section.
Lemma 1 (Simplified decryption [GV22]). Let p be a prime number, and let e > r ⩾ 1
and q be sufficiently high parameters with gcd(q, p) = 1. If (c0, c1) is a BGV encryption
of m under plaintext modulus pr
and ciphertext modulus q, then it can be decrypted as
c0
i ← [pe−r
ci]q, w ← [q−1
· (c0
0 + c0
1 · s)]pe and m ← [q · bw/pe−r
e]pr ,
where q−1
·q = 1 (mod pe
), and b·e denotes coefficient-wise rounding to the nearest integer.
Our NTT-friendly bootstrapping evaluates Lemma 1 in the homomorphic domain, and
it uses two primitives from Bajard et al. [BEHZ16]. Consider two coprime moduli
Q =
k
Y
i=1
qi and P =
`
Y
j=1
pj.
The first primitive - fast base extension - extends the modulus from Q to QP and is defined
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 39
as follows. Given an element a ∈ RQ in polynomial representation, compute
FastBaseExtQ→QP (a) =





k
X
i=1
"
a ·

Q
qi
−1
#
qi
·
Q
qi


pj



1⩽j⩽`
∈ RQP . (3)
Fast base extension possibly incurs additional overflows modulo Q. This means that the
output will be equal to a + Qr for some r ∈ R. However, denoting the infinity norm by
|| · ||∞, the overflows will be upper bounded as ||r||∞ ⩽ k/2.
The second primitive - small Montgomery reduction - takes an element b ∈ RQP in
polynomial representation subject to ||b||∞  P · m, and it outputs c ∈ RQ such that
c = b · P−1
(mod m). Moreover, the coefficients of the result will be reduced modulo m,
i.e., they are upper bounded as ||c||∞ ⩽ (1 + )m/2 for some   1. This functionality is
denoted by SmallMontQP →Q(b, m). During bootstrapping, we use small Montgomery
reduction to compensate for the overflows of fast base extension and to compute reduction
modulo pe
as required in the decryption formula.
NTT-friendly bootstrapping is specified in Algorithm 1 and is a translation of Lemma 1
to the homomorphic domain. We use three pairwise coprime moduli Q, q and b, where the
first two are products of NTT-friendly primes, and the last one is an NTT-friendly prime.
Conversion between a ciphertext and its ring elements is implicit in our notation: at every
place in the algorithm, we have ct = (c0, c1) with correction factor κ (and similarly for
other ciphertexts). Note that the input ciphertext and all other variables are assumed to
be in polynomial representation.
The algorithm first multiplies the ciphertext by pe−r
and converts to Montgomery
representation with respect to the auxiliary base b. Then the modulus is lifted to Q · q · b,
which causes extra overflows modulo q. These are compensated almost perfectly by the
small Montgomery reduction on the next line, which also converts back from Montgomery to
regular representation (i.e., it removes the additional b-factor). Then we reduce modulo pe
via another small Montgomery reduction, and as a side effect, the ciphertext gets multiplied
by q−1
, which is required in the decryption formula. The resulting ciphertext ct00
= (c00
0 , c00
1 )
is an encryption of w under plaintext modulus pe
and ciphertext modulus Q. Observe that
taking the product with the secret key s is implicit and does not require any computation
during bootstrapping [ASP13]. Finally, we perform the homomorphic rounding procedure
in the same way as HElib and restore the original correction factor. The correction factor
is also augmented with an additional factor of q−1
, which represents the multiplication
by q that is required in the decryption formula. Note that our algorithm does not change
key generation nor encryption, so it does not influence the security of BGV.
Algorithm 1 NTT-friendly bootstrapping
Input: ct ∈ R2
q with noise e
Output: ct00
∈ R2
q00 with noise e00
s.t. Dec(ct00
) = Dec(ct) and ||e00
||∞/q00
 ||e||∞/q
1: function Bootstrap(ct) . Store correction factor κ of ct
2: for i ∈ {0, 1} do
3: c0
i ← [ci · pe−r
· b]q . Residues defined mod q
4: c0
i ← FastBaseExtq→Q·q·b(c0
i) . Residues defined mod Q · q · b
5: c0
i ← SmallMontQ·q·b→Q·q(c0
i, q) . Reduce mod q and drop b
6: c00
i ← SmallMontQ·q→Q(c0
i, pe
) . Reduce mod pe
and drop q
7: end for
8: ct00
← bct00
/pe−r
e . Same as in HElib with initial κ00
← 1
9: return ct00
. Update correction factor as κ00
← κ00
· κ · q−1
10: end function
40 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
Table 2: Example opcodes (left) and micro-level operand addressing modes (right).
ISA Opcode Semantics
Macro LOAD Move data from distant to near memory
KSW Key switch a ciphertext
MORPH Perform automorphism on a ciphertext
Mid MULI Multiply a residue polynomial by constant
NTT Compute NTT of residue polynomial
FBE Fast Base Extension
Micro NTT1 Perform iteration of first NTT pass
MAC Multiply operands and add to accumulator
Mode Definition
$XXX address in distant memory
only for LOAD/STORE
rXXX address in middle memory
tXX register in near memory
nXXX immediate 32-bit scalar
iXXX index in moduli table
5 BASALISC Instruction Set Architecture
BASALISC is an adapted Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) architecture with
a three-level instruction set. This multi-level approach allows for reasoning at diverse
levels of abstraction, and aids in assuring correctness of our system. Having a hierarchy of
multiple intermediate representations and instruction sets, each with well-defined semantics,
means that we can implement and test each stage of the compiler toolchain separately.
In addition, different instruction set abstractions allow programmers to work at a higher
level of abstraction while allowing compiler writers and library authors to reason about
lower-level details such as scheduling and optimizations easily. For example, when writing
a program to run on BASALISC, the programmer need not know about low-level data
representations. We generate and reason over three distinct levels of instruction and
typesystem abstraction:
• Macro-instructions are at the highest level, with the largest data types and
the most complex operations. Entire ciphertexts, plaintexts, and key switching
matrices are treated as basic data types at this abstraction level. Operations include
ciphertext addition, multiplication, modulus and key switching, automorphisms, and
bootstrapping. Details about data representation and algorithms that implement
those operations are opaque at this level of abstraction.
• Mid-level instructions expose the Double-CRT data representation. The basic
data type at this level is a residue polynomial (a polynomial in RNS representation)
comprising up to 216
32-bit polynomial coefficients. Basic operations on these data
types include pointwise modular addition and multiplication on vectors of coefficients;
automorphisms; NTTs; and multiply-accumulate iterations commonly used in key
switching. Also included in this list are memory management instructions that Load
and Store data to and from off-chip memory.
• Micro-instructions correspond very closely with the specific operations performed
by the processing elements (PEs). The basic data type at this level contains as
many coefficient words (1024 or 2048) as can be processed simultaneously by a PE
or accessed in one on-chip memory cycle. Instructions at this level are delivered via
the Peripheral Component Interconnect Express (PCIe) interface to the BASALISC
processor for execution. This instruction level also includes rudimentary machine
control instructions.
The left subtable of Table 2 shows operation code mnemonics (opcodes) from each
level of our instruction set. Together with opcodes, BASALISC uses operand specifiers
(omitted from the table) with register-like addressing modes for all levels in its ISA and
memory hierarchy. The right subtable of Table 2 shows addressing mode examples for
operand specifiers at the Micro-instruction level. At this level, operands are either “chunks”
of 2048 32-bit coefficients within a residue polynomial, 32-bit scalar values, or natural
number indices into tables of moduli.
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 41
6 BASALISC Hardware Design
BASALISC 1.0 System Board
BASALISC 1.0 ASIC
2 x
64GB
2 x
64GB
BASALISC 1.0 FHE Accelerator
DDR1
APB
SBR
AXI
SBR
DDR0
APB
SBR
AXI
SBR
RISCV
TL/
APB
Low speed I/O
PCIe
APB
SBR
AXI
SBR High- speed
Interchip Bus
AXI
MGR
JTAG
HS
AXI
AXI
SBR
AXI
MGR
64 MB
CTB
AXI
DMA
Instr
Queue
Traffic Control Unit
(TCU)
PCIe x16
to Host
BASALISC 1.0 PEs
Permutation
PE
MAC
PE
NTT
PE
JTAG
Figure 2: BASALISC System Diagram.
Figure 2 shows a sys-
tem diagram of BASALISC.
BASALISC is a single-chip
FHE coprocessor, designed
in a 12nm Global Foundries
process, with additional off-
chip memory; high-speed
connectivity to its host sys-
tem; and extensibility via a
high-speed inter-chip inter-
connect. For its implemen-
tation, BASALISC employs
a mature asynchronous logic
process controlled by stan-
dard handshaking protocols
[DSL+
18], allowing units to
accelerate to a higher clock frequency whenever input data is available. Section 7.3
describes how this design choice helps to accelerate costly key switchings.
6.1 Memory Architecture
BASALISC includes four layers of memory hierarchy that exhibit diverse latencies and
capacities. Table 3 depicts these four layers, where - typical of computer memory hierarchies
- lower latency layers have smaller capacities. From farthest to nearest to the PEs, these
four layers comprise off-chip distant memory (DRAM), a middle memory Ciphertext Buffer
(CTB), a local Register File (RF) and Accumulator register (ACC) within the MAC PE.
A significant difference between typical memory hierarchies and that of BASALISC is the
working set size that each layer can hold. Still, we expect capacity limits of layers in our
memory hierarchy to be a major limiter of system performance. In particular, we expect
minimal locality of reference for key switching matrices, each of which is larger than the
entire CTB. We now describe the DRAM array and the CTB, and defer the description of
the MAC memory architecture to Section 7.3.
• The 64 MB CTB contains 224
locations, each of which holds a 32-bit residue
polynomial coefficient. In our largest supported parameter set, a single residue
polynomial consists of N = 216
= 64K coefficients and occupies one entire page
of the CTB. The CTB is a single-port SRAM array that can either read or write
2048 32-bit residue polynomial coefficients every machine cycle, providing a total
bandwidth of 8 Tb/s (at 1 GHz operation) to our set of data Processing Elements
(PEs) shown in yellow. As an advantage of FHE determinism, allocation and size of
all data and operands are bound at compile-time. This allows the BASALISC CTB
to be structured as an addressable set of ciphertext registers, instead of requiring
the complex functionality of a run-time cache memory. This set of registers is
compiler-managed with a true Least-Recently Used (LRU) replacement policy. CTB
Table 3: Memory hierarchy for ciphertext and key storage.
Memory Capacity Round-trip latency
Off-chip DRAM 256 GB > 100 ns
CTB 64 MB ∼3 ns
MAC RF 128 kB ∼1.25 ns
MAC ACC 8 kB 0.625 ns
42 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
bandwidth is not materially affected by concurrent transfer between distant memory
and the CTB: roughly at most 0.3% of CTB access cycles are used by our total
distant memory bandwidth.
• The 256 GB DRAM serves as the staging area for data that is scheduled for
processing and for results that are ready for retrieval by the host computer. In
addition, for many applications, the 64 MB CTB is too small to hold the sizeable
working sets of ciphertexts and key switching matrices. The DRAM array ensures
that CTB capacity misses do not have to spill to host memory.
6.2 System Design
In contrast to other FHE hardware accelerators [SFK+
21], BASALISC reduces cost and
manufacturing risk by relying only on commercially available standard packaging, DRAM,
and PCIe technologies and fits within 150mm2
[Ron20]. From the top down, the BASALISC
system can be described in different levels of hierarchy (see Figure 2):
• (Blue) The BASALISC System Board instantiates the distant DRAM memory
using two DDR4 subsystems, each providing up to 128 GB of DRAM and 25.6 GB/s
of bandwidth. At bottom left of the diagram is the 26 GB/s (near-peak) PCIe x16
channel that connects BASALISC to its host and carries data and instructions. We
expect applications with a large working set to be performance-limited by our DDR4
bandwidth. The twin DDR4 interfaces allow us to maximize the practical throughput
of the DRAM subsystem, by avoiding collisions between the PCIe-to-DRAM and
FHE-to-DRAM access streams.
• (Orange) The BASALISC ASIC includes JTAG I/O for testing and debuging,
a RISC-V CPU to configure BASALISC at startup, and the controllers and physical
interfaces (PHYs) for DDR4 and PCIe. These PHYs connect to the 512-bit wide
Advanced eXtensible Interface 4 (AXI4) interconnect that transfers data between
the DDR, PCIe, and the CTB. Both the AXI4 and CTB operate at a target cycle
time of 1 GHz. As a result, the AXI has a peak bandwidth of 32 GB/s for each
endpoint connection, all running in parallel.
• (Green) The BASALISC FHE Core Processor includes the CTB, AXI4 in-
frastructure, and a Traffic Control Unit (TCU). The TCU maintains a batch-queue
instruction buffer to manage instruction execution in the system. FHE programs
are deterministic: the compiler knows in advance about the flow of instructions and
data in memory. This allows the queue to be entirely compiler-managed and fairly
short (128 to 1024 instructions, depending on our performance analysis).
7 BASALISC Processing Elements
BASALISC’s on-chip PEs and their connection to the CTB are shown on the far right in
Figure 2. The BASALISC PEs that rely on the CTB for data are the Multiply-Accumulate
(MAC) PE (used in ciphertext addition, multiplication, and for kernels of operations such
as key switching); the Permutation PE (used to permute data into preferred orders to
achieve NTT processing, and also used for automorphisms); and the NTT PE (used to
accomplish number-theoretic transforms efficiently). We describe their capabilities below.
Whereas Figure 2 shows single PE instances, their implementation is a massively
multicore architecture that exploits innate parallelism in FHE ciphertext computations.
FHE arithmetic in RNS representation offers four types of parallelism: (i) over multiple
ciphertexts, (ii) over the polynomials within a ciphertext, (iii) over the residue levels
of a polynomial, and (iv) over the coefficients of a residue polynomial. Prior work has
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 43
x0
x4
x8
x12
x1
x5
x9
x13
x2
x6
x10
x14
x3
x7
x11
x15
ω2
16
ω1
16
ω3
16
ω4
16
ω2
16
ω6
16
ω6
16
ω3
16
ω9
16
ω4
32
ω4
32
ω4
32
ω4
32
ω8
32
ω8
32
ω8
32
ω8
32
ω12
32
ω12
32
ω12
32
ω12
32
ω1
4
ω1
4
ω1
4
ω1
4
ω1
4
ω1
4
ω1
4
ω1
4
ω1
32
ω1
32
ω1
32
ω2
32
ω2
32
ω2
32
ω3
32
ω3
32
ω3
32
X0
X8
X4
X12
X2
X10
X6
X14
X1
X9
X5
X13
X3
X11
X7
X15
NTT1 NTT2
chunk
Figure 3: 16-point radix-4 negacyclic NTT flow graph. Extra negacyclic twiddles (in blue)
are decomposed into two pre-multiply passes.
focused on (iii), instantiating multiple so-called Residue Polynomial Arithmetic Units
(RPAUs) [TRV20,RMA+
21,MAK+
22]. In contrast, BASALISC focuses on exploiting (iv),
due to two key observations. First, the number of residues decreases with the modulus
level in the BGV scheme, leading to would-be idle RPAUs as the computation gets closer
to bootstrapping. Second, as the lowest level of parallelism, coefficient-level parallelism
offers the best opportunity to exploit locality of reference.
7.1 Number-Theoretic Transform PE
Because of the focus on coefficient-level parallelism, BASALISC implements a high-radix
NTT PE. We expect that many BASALISC FHE applications will employ ring dimension
N = 65536 = 2562
to enable bootstrapping and thus arbitrary-depth computation. Thus,
our NTT PE employs a radix-256 butterfly, allowing us to compute 65536-point NTTs
with only two round trips to memory for each coefficient. NTTs of smaller sizes can be
computed through shortcut paths in our NTT butterfly network.
Following the generalized Cooley-Tukey NTT description of Equation 2, a radix-256
NTT chooses N1 = N2 = 256. The main arithmetic NTT unit consists of a 256-point
NTT (that computes the inner N1-point NTT and outer N2-point NTT) followed by 255
post-multipliers (that multiply with the twiddles ωn2k1
N ). We employ a standard DIF
flow graph for the 256-point NTT, where we replace multiplications ω0
= 1 with simple
pipeline balancing registers. Through this optimization, the N = 256-point sub-NTTs are
implemented with only 769 modular multipliers, instead of N/2 log(N) = 1024.
As discussed in Section 3.2, additional pre- and post-multiplication steps are required
to construct negacyclic forward and inverse NTTs from regular NTTs. Because a radix-256
butterfly already includes an array of 255 post-multipliers, it suffices to add 255 pre-
multipliers to support negacyclic NTTs. Figure 3 illustrates how a radix-4 unit is composed
to compute the full NTT flow graph in two passes that each take 4 chunks. In between the
passes is an implicit memory transposition that we enable with a conflict-free CTB design.
Our NTT PE instantiates four parallel 3-stage NTT units. Each unit is deeply pipelined
with 40 pipeline stages in order to run at 2 GHz. Together, these four parallel pipes
consume 1024 32-bit residue polynomial coefficients at that 2 GHz rate – sufficient to
consume all available data bandwidth from the CTB.
44 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
x0 x1 x2 x3
x4 x5 x6 x7
x8 x9 x10 x11
x12 x13 x14 x15
x0 x1 x2 x3
x4 x5 x6 x7
x8 x9 x10 x11
x12 x13 x14 x15 bank0
bank1
bank2
bank3
x5
x1
x13
x9
x5
x1
x13
x9
2x2
2x2
2x2
2x2
Permutation PE
Figure 4: Example conflict-free CTB layout for a 16-point radix-4 NTT. Data is striped
using the equation bank = row ⊕ col, which ensures that both entire columns or entire
rows can be read out without bank conflicts. The on-the-fly Permutation PE maps values
from bank order into natural order, as illustrated for access to the second column.
7.1.1 Conflict-Free Schedule
A well-known performance inhibitor for NTTs is that successive NTT passes access
coefficients at different memory strides, introducing access conflicts in memory. Prior
NTT accelerators present custom access patterns and reordering techniques that only work
for small-radix NTT architectures [RVM+
14,RLPD20] or require expensive in-memory
transpositions [SFK+
21]. BASALISC avoids reinventing the wheel, instead building upon
years of DSP literature [Coh76,Joh92,Ma99]. The most high-performance FFT accelerators
present conflict-free schedules [TL11,RV08,RMD+
15] to tackle this exact issue.
Conceptually, a N = N1N2 = 2562
-point radix-256 NTT can be represented as a
two-dimensional NTT, where the data is laid-out with N1 = 256 rows and N2 = 256
columns. In this format, the inner N1-point NTT requires coefficients in column-major
order, whereas the outer N2-point NTT requires data in row-major order. The crux of
building conflict-free NTT schedules is to structure the data so that it can be read out
in either order without bank conflicts. This requires a minimum of 256 independently
addressable banks, each containing 216
bank addresses (for a total CTB size of 224
values).
We employ a conflict-free layout based on XOR-permutations [RMD+
15], as illustrated
in Figure 4. In this layout, data with logical address {row, col} is stored at bank = row⊕col.
This layout ensures that each unique index for every element in every row and column
corresponds to a unique physically accessible bank of CTB SRAM.
When reading rows or columns from the CTB, values come out of memory in bank
order, one value for each bank from bank 0 to 255. However, operations like NTT require
values in natural order: when accessing a row, we need values sorted by column from 0 to
255, and when accessing a column, we need values sorted by row from 0 to 255. Thus, when
accessing row r, we must map bank i to index i ⊕ r. Likewise, when accessing column c,
we must map bank i to index i ⊕ c.
We build a custom “on-the-fly” Permutation PE to compute these XOR-based permu-
tations as data moves to or from the other PEs. Furthermore, we observe a remarkable
optimization opportunity for this unit. By implementing a slightly more general permuta-
tion PE that supports permutations of the form i 7→ (i · a + b) ⊕ c, we can not only use
the Permutation PE to implement conflict-free XOR permutations, but also any BGV ring
automorphism without additional hardware. See Section 7.2 for more details.
7.1.2 Twiddle Factor Factory
Similarly to polynomial residue coefficients, twiddle factors are 32-bit integers. There are
N twiddle factors for each residue for both forward and inverse NTT, and a maximum of
56 residues at max-capacity key switching, together requiring ∼29.4 MB of twiddle factor
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 45
material in a naive implementation. Moreover, our four NTT units have 5116 multipliers
total that must be fed each cycle with twiddles, requiring massively parallel access into
this storage memory. BASALISC prevents this storage requirement in two ways. First, we
contribute new insights and a twiddle decomposition method that reduces the required
parallel number of distinct twiddle accesses. Second, we develop a custom twiddle factor
factory that drastically reduces the number of twiddles stored. In the remainder, we
analyze only the forward NTT, but identical optimizations apply to the inverse NTT.
For a forward negacyclic NTT, each input xi is pre-multiplied by the twiddle φi
= ωi
2N .
Using techniques from the DSP literature [Gar16], we decompose the additional negacyclic
twiddles to extract a regular pattern, and to distribute them evenly between the two NTT
passes in the flow graph. This is illustrated in Figure 3 by the extra twiddles in blue. The
benefit of this technique is twofold. Firstly, it can be seen that the pre-multiplications
become identical for each chunk in both passes. This allows the four NTT units to share
the same pre-multiply twiddles, and drastically reduces the total number of pre-multiply
twiddles from N = 2562
to 2 ·
√
N, easily fitting in a small SRAM. Second, the internal
butterfly twiddles (powers of ω256) are now a strict subset of the pre-multiply twiddle in
the first pass (powers of ω512). Both can therefore be routed from the same small SRAM.
The remaining twiddle factor complexity sits in the post-multiply twiddles. For each
chunk k, there are 255 twiddles ωik
2562 . An SRAM storing vectors of 255 twiddles with
depth 255 for each residue is still much too large. We propose a technique to reduce
the width of this SRAM. It can be coupled with techniques that reduce the depth of this
SRAM, such as On-the-fly-Twiddling (OT) [KJPA20]. To reduce the width, we propose
a power generator circuit that trades SRAM storage for multipliers. The main idea is
as follows. By using the identity ωik
2562 = ωi
2562/k, it can be observed that the required
twiddles for chunk k are always the 255 consecutive powers of a seed value ω = ω2562/k.
Using only ω, we can compute its successive powers in a number of multiply layers. The
first layer computes ω2
from ω, with a single multiplier. The second layer takes ω2
and ω
to compute ω4
and ω3
, and so forth. Every multiplier in the circuit produces a unique
value that is used as an output, so the number of multipliers to generate 255 powers from ω
is simply 254. Using this technique, instead of storing vectors of 255 twiddles with depth
255 for each residue, it suffices to store the single seeds with depth 255.
7.2 Permutation PE
A pair of Permutation PEs forms the interface between the CTB and the other PEs. Our
original contribution is a slightly more generalized Permutation PE that can support both
conflict-free schedules required by NTT operations, as well as BGV automorphisms with
the same hardware. In order to do so, the Permutation PE is generalized to compute
permutations of the form i 7→ (i · a + b) ⊕ c. Each permutation unit reorders an array of
input coefficients to produce a permuted output array of the same length.
The Read Permutation PE unscrambles data in conflict-free CTB bank ordering in
order to pass it to the other PEs expecting natural ordering. It is a specialized instance of
the more general Permutation PE that only implements permutations i 7→ i ⊕ c, requiring
values a = 1 and b = 0. The Write Permutation PE passes data in the opposite direction.
It implements the general permutation i 7→ (i · a + b) ⊕ c in order to re-scramble the data
into its conflict-free layout, or to compute ring automorphisms. In the latter case, the
output of the Read Permutation PE is fed directly into the input of the Write Permutation
PE to achieve the complete operation of the automorphism.
Each Permutation PE itself is split into two portions. Firstly, the data-permutation
portion of the logic is implemented using 2×2 switch nodes placed using an Omega-Network
topology. Secondly, a configuration portion takes constants a, b, and c in order to generate
the routing pattern for the switches in the network. The configuration portion of the logic
attaches the routing pattern to the data and the combined payload word is sent through
46 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
the network. The switch nodes forward the data according to the least significant bit of
the pattern part of the payload data, which is also removed before forwarding. Thus the
message is reduced by one bit at each stage of the network, and at the end, the payload
only contains the data portion.
7.3 Multiply-Accumulate PE
Figure 5: Simplified Diagram of MAC PE ar-
chitecture.
We realize modular addition and mul-
tiplication for FHE in the Multiply-
Accumulate (MAC) PE, shown in Fig-
ure 5. This pipelined unit can start 2048
32-bit modular addition or modular mul-
tiply operations each cycle, if data is
available. Because the MAC PE is built
with asynchronous logic, it free-runs at
1.6 GHz when not accessing the 1 GHz
CTB. Therefore, operations that read
and/or write to the CTB are limited by
the 1 GHz CTB bottleneck, while other operations that operate on local data (accumulator
register or register file) can accelerate to 1.6 GHz, without using additional logic. The
asynchronous logic provides significant area and latency savings, compared to wide Clock
Domain Crossings (CDCs) that would be necessary to achieve this 60% frequency increase
using a clocked approach instead. At left in the figure, the 2048 a inputs - each 32-bit
in size - come from the CTB. The b inputs are replicated copies of a 32-bit constant
from the instruction stream. The MAC has a 16-entry Register File (RF), shown at top
in the figure. In addition, there is a single accumulator register at the output of the
adder/subtractor/accumulator unit, shown at right in the figure.
Using the multiplexers shown in the figure, this arrangement can accomplish a variety
of functions. Residue chunk multiplication by or addition of a constant to each coefficient
can be accomplished at full rate: 2048 32-bit operations per cycle. Multiplication or
addition of chunks when both are sourced directly from the CTB can be accomplished
at half-rate, using a register to buffer one operand from the CTB, and directly feeding
the second operand into the operation from the CTB in a second read cycle. Acceleration
of tight kernels that repeatedly process the same chunks can be achieved by storing up
to 16 different chunks in the RF and operating on them at full rate. Finally, there is a
multiply-add capability that allows double-rate processing: a multiply and accumulate in
every cycle. The above possibilities are impacted by the needed write bandwidth to the
CTB. Write operations might occur as often as for every chunk result, or much less often
when the local RF or the accumulator store results during tight kernel operations.
A particularly important example of kernel acceleration in the MAC is key switching,
which typically makes up the large majority of the workload of an FHE program. We
implement the so-called hybrid key switching algorithm [KPZ21], which uses the “fast base
extension” subroutine from Equation 3 as an inner loop. For the parameters of Table 1, fast
base extension first pre-computes a table of 12 residue polynomials, and then computes 40
different weighted sums of those values, with constant weights. Use of the local registers in
the MAC PE and the compound multiply-accumulate function realizes a 44× improvement
compared to a naive design. In addition, this approach reduces the CTB usage from nearly
100% to only 10.6%, saving 90% of the CTB for use by the other PEs.
7.4 Modular Multiplier Arithmetic Optimization
Both the MAC and NTT butterfly units use Montgomery modular arithmetic, optimized
for NTT-friendly primes (see Mert et al. [MÖS19]). Specifically, instead of supporting the
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 47
Table 4: Area and power comparison of NTT
single-butterfly unit with original and opti-
mized Montgomery multipliers at 1 GHz.
Mult. Design Area TDP @0.72V, 125C
Unoptimized 3768 µm2
7.2 µW
Optimized 2052 µm2
4.3 µW
full 32-bit prime value, the multiplier is
optimized to only support a subset where
the lower 17 bits of the prime are fixed (bits
16:1 are tied to 0 and bit 0 is tied to 1).
This optimization saves 46% in area and
40% in power consumption compared to
a generic multiplier that can support all
moduli, and is enabled by our NTT-friendly bootstrapping approach from Section 4. The
results are summarized in Table 4.
8 BASALISC Compilation and Simulation Tools
A major component of BASALISC is co-design of software and hardware with the intent
of realizing optimal performance. Our software tools include a domain-specific compiler
Artemidorus and a simulator Simba, working on multiple levels of abstraction.
8.1 Artemidorus
Our toolchain begins with a high-level Domain-Specific Language (DSL) that allows
programmers to create FHE applications to execute on BASALISC, and which features
data types including fixed-point numbers, vectors, and matrices. The program passes
through several stages in our compiler Artemidorus.
Programs written in the Artemidorus DSL are first translated into high-level FHE
circuits. The toolchain is able to type-check these circuits and combinations of circuits,
to make sure the overall computation is well-formed. From this circuit representation,
Artemidorus infers statistics such as circuit depth, number of bit operations, and so on.
Next, these circuit statistics are used to expand vector and matrix operations into BGV
primitives; key and modulus switching operations are inferred by the tool; each operation
is tagged with the length of its modulus chain (i.e., the number of prime factors in q), and
then expanded into primitive operations on individual residue polynomials for each factor
in the modulus. Finally, using a cycle-accurate model of the BASALISC microarchitecture,
Artemidorus allocates memory regions and registers and schedules instructions. Instruction
traces are produced at our three levels of the ISA, which pass to Simba for performance or
correctness simulation. Especially Simba-micro, the micro-level performance simulator, is
essential to evaluate BASALISC at this point in the design stage.
8.2 Simba-micro
Our micro-level performance simulator employs a step-based operational semantics to
model the execution of the BASALISC coprocessor. There are five basic operational
components: the CTB, and the four PEs (MAC, Read Permutation, NTT, and Write
Permutation). The simulator models a micro-instruction’s life cycle from instruction
dispatch, to data transfer from CTB to the appropriate functional unit, to proceeding
down the pipeline, to the “writeback” phase.
In order to account for the different clock rates of the different components (see Table 5),
we use a global “micro-clock” which operates at 6 GHz as the time increment for the
model’s step function. We made the simplifying assumption that the MAC operates at
1.5 GHz. In this way, we were able to model each PE’s progress by causing the CTB to be
accessible every 6 micro-cycles, the MAC every 4 micro-cycles, and the permutation/NTT
units every 3 micro-cycles. This behavior is modeled by supplying each component with a
wait counter that is reset to these values every time it is accessed; the component is only
48 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
Table 5: Performance characteristics of BASALISC hardware elements.
Component fmax Area TDP @0.72V Throughput
CTB†
1.0 GHz 77.9 mm2
9 W 2 × 32 Tb/s
MAC PE 1.6 GHz 7.17 mm2
18.6 W 102 Tb/s
NTT PE 2.0 GHz 16 mm2
24.6 W 32 Tb/s
Permuation PE 2.0 GHz 0.16 mm2
∼0 W 32 Tb/s
PCIe 500 MHz 12 mm2
5 W
26 GB/s
DDR 800 MHz 18.2 mm2
51 GB/s
Overall > 1.0 GHz 150 mm2
57.5 - 115 W N/A
†Operation of PEs above the CTB’s frequency is advantageous when each can run independently.
accessible if the counter is 0. If a component is accessible but has no work to do in the
given micro-cycle, it simply waits.
Each individual PE is modeled as a pipeline with a certain number of stages and “stage
capacity” (number of coefficients that fit in each pipeline stage). The MAC’s stage capacity
is 2048 coefficients, while the other three have a capacity of 1024. Every time the given PE
is enabled (its wait counter is 0), the pipeline advances. When there is a write at the end
of the pipeline, it stays at the end of the pipeline until the CTB is available for writing.
Once a pipeline is full, instruction dispatch is no longer possible to that pipeline, and the
control mechanism allows the pending writes to occur.
After execution, the following data is reported by Simba-micro: number of CTB
cycles (i.e., 6 micro-cycles) of execution, overall CTB utilization (percentage of time spent
reading/writing/stalling), and utilization of each PE (how “full” the pipelines are).
9 Evaluation of BASALISC
BASALISC is a closed-source architecture with an implementation-in-progress but not
delivered to silicon yet. For that reason, we evaluate BASALISC in diverse ways at this
point in the design cycle.
9.1 Physical Realizability
One way to evaluate the design of BASALISC and the BASALISC architecture is by a
physical design implementation in a practical semiconductor process, with a reasonable
target die size and operational frequency target. One resulting evaluation criterion that
can be objectively measured using this approach is timing closure – the verification that,
with placement and routing of key blocks complete, and using industry best practice
estimation of inter-block wire delays based on a mature floorplan, the design achieves
a target operating frequency that yields useful levels of performance. In the case of
BASALISC, we completed placement and routing of the novel circuitry - our PEs - and
the CTB RAM block. Our operational frequency target was a minimum of 1.0 GHz at
the standard “slow-slow” (SS) process corner and a supply voltage of 0.72V in the 12nm
low-power Global Foundries process. We achieved timing closure for the diverse functional
units at the frequencies given in Table 5.
Our floorplan shown in Figure 6 uses actual IP block sizes for DDR4 DRAM, PCIe,
our RAM array, and placed and routed PEs. I/O pads are part of the DDR4/PCIe macros,
including bumps for power and ground. Interface clock trees run along provisioned routing
channels; other big clock trees are avoided through asynchronous design. Everything is
drawn assuming 75% density, with a 200µm peripheral gap accounting for process DRC
rules, including crackstop, corners, and ESD protection. Our target die size is constrained
to 150mm2
with an aspect ratio of 2 : 1 or less [Ron20], which we achieve with a 14.4mm ×
10.4mm layout that satisfies both of those constraints.
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 49
DDR4
RISCV
14.4mm
10.4mm
AXI
outer
NoC
&
Ctrl
Inter-Chip
I/O
DDR4
AXI outer NoC & Ctrl
PCIe
X4
PCIe
X4
PCIe
X4
PCIe
X4
PCIe 4.0 X16 Controller
Permutation PE
Permutation PE
Permutation PE
Permutation PE
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
NTT PE
2 x 2mm
NTT PE
2 x 2mm
NTT PE
2 x 2mm
NTT PE
2 x 2mm
Permutation PE
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs 8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs 8MACs
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8Kx64
8MACs
Figure 6: Floorplan of BASALISC with all cells placed and intra-block routing complete.
Note that the MAC PE and Permutation PE are interleaved within the CTB.
9.2 Logic Emulation and Formal Verification
A commonplace verification step prior to ASIC manufacturing provides yet another
evaluation criterion: successful hardware emulation of critical logic in the design. In the
case of BASALISC, that critical logic is the set of processing elements (MAC, permutation,
and NNT PEs). We successfully emulated each PE in full, using test vectors extracted from
our Verilog testbenches and our formal models of each PE. Each PE passed its emulation
test vector suite.
In addition to hardware emulation, BASALISC employs formal methods with two
primary goals: first, that the design be proven mathematically correct, and second, that the
design be proven consistent at every intermediate representation by demonstrating proof of
equivalence. For both the mathematical and consistency proofs, BASALISC employs the
Cryptol language [LM03] and related tools. In order to satisfy mathematical correctness,
top-level FHE algorithms are expressed as a mathematical model in Cryptol. Subsequently,
using Cryptol’s proof capabilities, the mathematical model is proven to sustain a set of
separately-developed correctness definitions. Proof of equivalence is provided through a
two-step approach. First, formal equivalence is proven between the high-level mathematical
Cryptol model and a low-level logic-oriented Cryptol description using SAW [CFH+
13].
Next, the low-level Cryptol is converted to Verilog that we prove equivalent to the optimized
implementation-Verilog using the commercial Synopsys Formality tool.
9.3 Benchmark Performance Simulation
We evaluate BASALISC’s performance on a set of benchmarks. Table 6 summarizes the
results and compares to an HElib software reference, which was executed on an Intel Xeon
E5-2630 v2 CPU at 2.6 GHz with a single thread. All results are generated using the
parameter set from Table 1 (only the plaintext modulus for database lookup is chosen
differently for comparison reasons). This results in ciphertext size 21 MB and key switching
50 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
keys of size 56 MB.1
The first part of Table 6 compares BASALISC performance to HElib for a set of micro-
benchmarks: a ciphertext NTT and the basic and auxiliary homomorphic operations. Each
operand is a freshly encrypted ciphertext. We achieve major speedups for all homomorphic
operations. In particular, we accelerate key switching - the most time-intensive operation -
by a factor of 2.0 · 103
×.
Table 6: Performance comparison of HElib and BASALISC.
Operation HElib BASALISC Speedup
NTT 27 ms 11 µs 2.5 · 103
×
Add/Sub 4 ms 8 µs 5.0 · 102
×
Plaintext mul 44 ms 5 µs 8.8 · 103
×
Mul (no key switch) 58 ms 20 µs 2.9 · 103
×
Permutation (no key switch) 12 ms 11 µs 1.1 · 103
×
Key switching 580 ms 292 µs 2.0 · 103
×
Database lookup†
2,325 s 267 ms 8.7 · 103
×
Thin bootstrapping 160 s 40 ms 4.0 · 103
×
Logistic regression 217,000 s 40,500 ms 5.4 · 103
×
†Simulation done with t = 241 to make the result comparable with F1 [SFK+21].
We also simulated execution time for three realistic macro-benchmarks: a database
lookup, a bootstrapping operation and a single iteration of encrypted logistic regression
training. The last two benchmarks require bootstrapping. This is done with HElib’s thin
bootstrapping procedure [HS21], but adapted to our NTT-friendly approach.
• Database lookup. This application comes from the HElib repository [HEl]. An
encrypted key is sent from a client to a server, then the server compares it homomor-
phically against a database of encrypted key-value pairs. Finally, the corresponding
value is returned to the client in encrypted format. We achieve a speedup of 8,700
times over HElib for the server computation.
• Thin bootstrapping. This benchmark is evaluated with bootstrapping parameter
e = 4 (see Section 4). Bootstrapping requires in total 26 key switching keys, which
are loaded from DRAM into the CTB during the procedure. Simba-micro reports
only 40ms of simulated execution time, which is a speedup of 4,000 times over HElib.
The required noise budget before bootstrapping is 47 bits to account for a linear
transformation and correctness of decryption. The remaining noise budget after
bootstrapping is 790 bits, which gives 18 multiplicative levels between successive
bootstrapping operations.
• Logistic regression. We estimate execution time on a single iteration of secure
logistic regression (LR) training, using the 1-bit gradient descent algorithm of Chen
et al. [CGBH+
18]. This application homomorphically trains a machine learning
model on a 1,024-sample, 10-feature infant mortality data set from the US Centers for
Disease Control. As a BASALISC instruction trace, logistic regression is composed
of 900K high-level, 800M mid-level, and 27B micro-level instructions, which includes
in total 513 bootstrapping operations. Simba-micro reports a simulated execution
time of 40.5s. Because logistic regression is not in HElib, software execution time is
estimated by counting individual operations. Since this benchmark is bootstrapping-
dominated, the obtained speedup is similar to thin bootstrapping.
1Each key switching key is a matrix in Rd×2
QP , where the benchmarks use d = 4. This results in a key size
of 2d · N · log2(QP) ≈ 112 MB. However, the second column is uniformly distributed, so instead of storing
it, we keep a seed and generate it on the fly. This technique is standard and also used in HElib [HS20].
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 51
Table 7: Comparison of BASALISC with different BGV/CKKS accelerators.
BASALISC F1 BTS CraterLake
Scheme BGV BGV/CKKS CKKS CKKS
Area 150mm2
150mm2
374mm2
472mm2
Technology 12nm 12/14nm 7nm 12/14nm
Power 115W 180W 163W 320W
Bootstrapping speedup 4,000× 1,830×/1,195× 2,237× 4,400×
LR speedup†
5,400× —/7,200× 1,306× 2,978×
†Using [CGBH+18] for BGV LR and [HHCP19] for CKKS LR.
BASALISC is optimized for the default ring dimension N = 216
, which enables
bootstrapping with a 128-bit security target. Smaller parameter sets are insufficient to
support bootstrapping at this security level, but they can be useful in leveled applications
of low multiplicative depth. BASALISC’s speedup tends to be somewhat smaller for
smaller ring dimension, but it is still significant. For example, database lookup is 2, 600×
faster for N = 214
, and thin bootstrapping with N = 215
achieves 2, 500× speedup.
9.4 Related Work
We perform a comparison to prior and concurrent FHE accelerators. Many early works do
not report bootstrapping benchmarks or simply do not support it [PNPM15,MAK+
22,
CMV+
15, DÖS14, SRTJ+
19, SRJV+
18, SRJV+
15, RLPD20, TRV20, ABK20, SYYT20].
These architectures support only unrealistically small parameter sets, often allowing
them to fully compute on-chip. Furthermore, not all accelerators implement full FHE
computations, but rather individual operations such as the NTT. As one outcome, these
other approaches require frequent interaction with a host processor to sequence operations
and combine results. In this category of accelerators, HEAX [RLPD20] achieves the most
siginificant acceleration numbers, in the order of 200× for high-level operations such as
key switching, compared to SEAL [SEA22].
Other accelerators that support bootstrapping implement the homomorphic scheme
CKKS. Although CKKS and BGV are very similar, there are important low-level differences,
and an accelerator for one scheme may not necessarily support the other. BASALISC’s
comparison to the related BGV/CKKS accelerators is summarized in Table 7.
BTS [KKK+
21] is a CKKS accelerator with a large 374mm2
area budget (2.5× ours).
BTS uses a grid-based microarchitecture that lays out 2,048 PEs as 32 by 64. Conceptually,
this architecture is much more complex than the simple vector architecture of BASALISC.
Each PE unit has a local SRAM memory, an NTT unit, a “base extension” unit, adders,
and multipliers. This incurs a lot of communication between the PEs, so to simplify
the data movement management, they treat the entire output of each PE as a “package
of coefficients”. This restricts the automorphisms that BTS can evaluate to the shape
c(X) 7→ c(X5i
). While sufficient for CKKS, BTS cannot compute all automorphisms for
BGV bootstrapping. BTS uses On-the-fly Twiddling (OT) [KJPA20] to store twiddle
factors. As we mentioned in Section 7.1.2, this technique can be further combined with
our more efficient twiddle factor factory to drastically reduce the requirements of twiddle
factor storage even more. Even at the larger area budget, BTS reports similar speedups to
BASALISC. Respectively, in a first benchmark involving ciphertext multiplication and
bootstrapping, and a second logistic regression training benchmark, BTS outperforms the
Lattigo software library by 2,237× and 1,306×.
The architecture that is closest to ours and also supports BGV is F1 [SFK+
21]. F1 is an
ASIC architecture targeting the same die size (150mm2
), technology node (12nm GF) and
clock frequency (1 GHz). F1 reports a bootstrapping time of 2.4ms, compared to 40ms for
52 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
our macro-benchmark. However, these numbers are not directly comparable: F1 provides
lower security (4× smaller ring dimension N) and bootstraps a plaintext space of only 1
bit with no packing, whereas our benchmark has plaintext modulus 1273
with packing
capability. The authors also report execution time for database lookup, but again with
smaller ring dimension. F1’s speedup for this application - around 7, 000× - is comparable
to ours. Although F1 is programmable and could support packed bootstrapping, it does not
have enough multiplicative levels available to run it at a realistic security level. Moreover,
F1 scales poorly to larger parameter sets: it is optimized for simple BV key switching,
which is less efficient than hybrid key switching for high-depth computations [KPZ21].
Our MAC PE with local RF is essential to accelerate hybrid key switching.
A novel aspect of our accelerator is the conflict-free CTB and NTT, with the corre-
sponding Permutation PE that reuses the same hardware for NTT and automorphism.
Compared to F1’s FFT algorithm, we avoid an expensive matrix transpose unit by comput-
ing the same transpose directly within the CTB. F1’s matrix transpose unit must buffer
entire ciphertext polynomials within the NTT PE, which is prohibitive for our parameter
set. Whereas BASALISC includes a highly-optimized twiddle factor factory, F1 does not
describe how to implement its large twiddle factor SRAM.
A recently proposed follow-up work to F1 is CraterLake [SFK+
22]. CraterLake makes
two improvements over F1 that we considered from the onset, but which BASALISC
supports more efficiently. Firstly, CraterLake adds support for hybrid key switching
through a complex “vector chaining” technique. BASALISC supports the same algorithm
efficiently within its simple MAC unit with an integrated 16-entry register file. Secondly,
CraterLake observes that F1’s SRAM NTT matrix transpose does not scale to larger
parameters sets. It therefore decomposes this into a smaller intra-lane-group SRAM
transpose, and an extra inter-lane-group fixed permutation network, both distinct from
the central register file. BASALISC leverages the existing CTB memory infrastructure to
compute transposes without additional units or memory, using its conflict-free schedule
based on XOR-permutations.
CraterLake is a substantially larger chip (472mm2
, 320W) than BASALISC, and only
evaluates CKKS. It accelerates CKKS packed bootstrapping by 4,400 times, which is
similar to our speedup for BGV packed bootstrapping. At the same time, BASALISC
appears closer to tape-out: CraterLake does not formally verify its PEs, does not present
a layout or floorplan, and includes difficult-to-manufacture IP cores such as HBM2E.
10 Conclusion
FHE enables new privacy-preserving applications, but its adoption is limited because of
high computational costs. BASALISC accelerates FHE computations by more than three
orders of magnitude over CPUs, and thereby takes a step toward practical feasibility.
In contrast to prior works, BASALISC supports all BGV operations, including fully-
packed bootstrapping, in a single ASIC architecture. Our design includes a complete
memory hierarchy, and an ISA that supports different levels of abstraction. We propose
several hardware improvements in the NTT architecture, and show that its permutation unit
can be generalized to compute BGV automorphisms without additional area. BASALISC
saves area and power consumption by restricting its multipliers to NTT-friendly primes.
This optimization still allows BGV bootstrapping, so it does not compromise generality.
We evaluate the design of BASALISC for correctness and performance. Our functional
units are emulated and formally verified to meet their specification. We also simulate
performance on three FHE macro-benchmarks, showing over 5,000 times speedup compared
to classical software implementations. BASALISC has been selected as a candidate for
future fabrication of an IC that can be applied in real-world applications.
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 53
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) under Contract No. HR0011-21-C-0034. The views, opinions, and/or
findings expressed are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing
the official views or policies of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. This
work was additionally supported in part by CyberSecurity Research Flanders with reference
number VR20192203 and the Research Council KU Leuven (C16/15/058). Michiel Van
Beirendonck is funded by Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) as Strategic Basic (SB)
PhD fellow (project number 1SD5621N). Robin Geelen is funded in part by Research
Foundation – Flanders (FWO) under a PhD Fellowship fundamental research (project
number 1162123N).
References
[ABK20] Rashmi S. Agrawal, Lake Bu, and Michel A. Kinsy. Fast arithmetic hardware
library for rlwe-based homomorphic encryption. In 28th IEEE Annual Inter-
national Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines,
FCCM 2020, Fayetteville, AR, USA, May 3-6, 2020, page 206. IEEE, 2020.
[ACC+
18] Martin Albrecht, Melissa Chase, Hao Chen, Jintai Ding, Shafi Goldwasser,
Sergey Gorbunov, Shai Halevi, Jeffrey Hoffstein, Kim Laine, Kristin Lauter,
Satya Lokam, Daniele Micciancio, Dustin Moody, Travis Morrison, Amit Sa-
hai, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Homomorphic encryption security standard.
Technical report, HomomorphicEncryption.org, Toronto, Canada, November
2018.
[AHU74] Alfred V. Aho, John E. Hopcroft, and Jeffrey D. Ullman. The Design and
Analysis of Computer Algorithms. Addison-Wesley, 1974.
[ASP13] Jacob Alperin-Sheriff and Chris Peikert. Practical bootstrapping in quasilinear
time. In Annual Cryptology Conference, pages 1–20. Springer, 2013.
[BEHZ16] Jean-Claude Bajard, Julien Eynard, M Anwar Hasan, and Vincent Zucca.
A full rns variant of fv like somewhat homomorphic encryption schemes. In
International Conference on Selected Areas in Cryptography, pages 423–442.
Springer, 2016.
[BGV14] Zvika Brakerski, Craig Gentry, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. (leveled) fully
homomorphic encryption without bootstrapping. ACM Transactions on
Computation Theory (TOCT), 6(3):1–36, 2014.
[BIP+
22] Charlotte Bonte, Ilia Iliashenko, Jeongeun Park, Hilder V. L. Pereira, and
Nigel P. Smart. Final: Faster fhe instantiated with ntru and lwe. Cryptology
ePrint Archive, Report 2022/074, 2022. https://ia.cr/2022/074.
[CFH+
13] Kyle Carter, Adam Foltzer, Joe Hendrix, Brian Huffman, and Aaron Tomb.
Saw: The software analysis workbench. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM
SIGAda Annual Conference on High Integrity Language Technology, HILT
’13, page 15–18, New York, NY, USA, 2013. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[CGBH+
18] Hao Chen, Ran Gilad-Bachrach, Kyoohyung Han, Zhicong Huang, Amir
Jalali, Kim Laine, and Kristin Lauter. Logistic regression over encrypted
data from fully homomorphic encryption. BMC medical genomics, 11(4):3–12,
2018.
54 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
[CGGI20] Ilaria Chillotti, Nicolas Gama, Mariya Georgieva, and Malika Izabachène.
Tfhe: fast fully homomorphic encryption over the torus. Journal of Cryptology,
33(1):34–91, 2020.
[CH18] Hao Chen and Kyoohyung Han. Homomorphic lower digits removal and
improved fhe bootstrapping. In Annual International Conference on the
Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, pages 315–337. Springer,
2018.
[CJL+
20] Ilaria Chillotti, Marc Joye, Damien Ligier, Jean-Baptiste Orfila, and Samuel
Tap. Concrete: Concrete operates on ciphertexts rapidly by extending tfhe. In
WAHC 2020–8th Workshop on Encrypted Computing & Applied Homomorphic
Cryptography, volume 15, 2020.
[CKKS17] Jung Hee Cheon, Andrey Kim, Miran Kim, and Yongsoo Song. Homomorphic
encryption for arithmetic of approximate numbers. In Tsuyoshi Takagi and
Thomas Peyrin, editors, Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2017, pages
409–437, Cham, 2017. Springer International Publishing.
[CMV+
15] Donald Donglong Chen, Nele Mentens, Frederik Vercauteren, Sujoy Sinha Roy,
Ray C. C. Cheung, Derek Pao, and Ingrid Verbauwhede. High-Speed Poly-
nomial Multiplication Architecture for Ring-LWE and SHE Cryptosystems.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, 62(1):157–166,
January 2015.
[Coh76] D. Cohen. Simplified control of fft hardware. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing, 24(6):577–579, 1976.
[DÖS14] Yarkın Doröz, Erdinç Öztürk, and Berk Sunar. Accelerating fully homomor-
phic encryption in hardware. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 64(6):1509–
1521, 2014.
[DSL+
18] Mike Davies, Narayan Srinivasa, Tsung-Han Lin, Gautham Chinya, Yongqiang
Cao, Sri Harsha Choday, Georgios Dimou, Prasad Joshi, Nabil Imam, Shweta
Jain, Yuyun Liao, Chit-Kwan Lin, Andrew Lines, Ruokun Liu, Deepak
Mathaikutty, Steven McCoy, Arnab Paul, Jonathan Tse, Guruguhanathan
Venkataramanan, Yi-Hsin Weng, Andreas Wild, Yoonseok Yang, and Hong
Wang. Loihi: A neuromorphic manycore processor with on-chip learning.
IEEE Micro, 38(1):82–99, 2018.
[Gar16] Mario Garrido. A new representation of fft algorithms using triangular
matrices. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers,
63(10):1737–1745, 2016.
[Gen09] Craig Gentry. Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices. In Michael
Mitzenmacher, editor, Proceedings of the 41st Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing, STOC 2009, Bethesda, MD, USA, May 31 - June 2,
2009, pages 169–178. ACM, 2009.
[GHS12a] Craig Gentry, Shai Halevi, and Nigel P Smart. Fully homomorphic encryption
with polylog overhead. In Annual International Conference on the Theory
and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, pages 465–482. Springer, 2012.
[GHS12b] Craig Gentry, Shai Halevi, and Nigel P Smart. Homomorphic evaluation of
the aes circuit. In Annual Cryptology Conference, pages 850–867. Springer,
2012.
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 55
[GV22] Robin Geelen and Frederik Vercauteren. Bootstrapping for bgv and bfv
revisited. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2022.
[HEl] HElib country lookup example. https://github.com/homenc/HElib/tree/
master/examples/BGV_country_db_lookup. Accessed: 2022-12-17.
[HHCP19] Kyoohyung Han, Seungwan Hong, Jung Hee Cheon, and Daejun Park. Logistic
regression on homomorphic encrypted data at scale. In The Thirty-Third
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2019, The Thirty-First
Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2019, The
Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence,
EAAI 2019, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, January 27 - February 1, 2019, pages
9466–9471. AAAI Press, 2019.
[HS14] Shai Halevi and Victor Shoup. Algorithms in helib. In Juan A. Garay and
Rosario Gennaro, editors, Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2014 - 34th
Annual Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 17-21, 2014,
Proceedings, Part I, volume 8616 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
554–571. Springer, 2014.
[HS20] Shai Halevi and Victor Shoup. Design and implementation of helib: a
homomorphic encryption library. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2020.
[HS21] Shai Halevi and Victor Shoup. Bootstrapping for helib. Journal of Cryptology,
34(1):1–44, 2021.
[Joh92] L.G. Johnson. Conflict free memory addressing for dedicated fft hardware.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Analog and Digital Signal
Processing, 39(5):312–316, 1992.
[KJPA20] Sangpyo Kim, Wonkyung Jung, Jaiyoung Park, and Jung Ho Ahn. Accel-
erating number theoretic transformations for bootstrappable homomorphic
encryption on gpus. In IEEE International Symposium on Workload Charac-
terization, IISWC 2020, Beijing, China, October 27-30, 2020, pages 264–275.
IEEE, 2020.
[KKK+
21] Sangpyo Kim, Jongmin Kim, Michael Jaemin Kim, Wonkyung Jung, Minsoo
Rhu, John Kim, and Jung Ho Ahn. BTS: An Accelerator for Bootstrappable
Fully Homomorphic Encryption. arXiv:2112.15479 [cs], December 2021.
[KPZ21] Andrey Kim, Yuriy Polyakov, and Vincent Zucca. Revisiting homomorphic
encryption schemes for finite fields. In Mehdi Tibouchi and Huaxiong Wang,
editors, Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2021, pages 608–639, Cham,
2021. Springer International Publishing.
[Lat22] Lattigo v3. Online: https://github.com/tuneinsight/lattigo, April
2022. EPFL-LDS, Tune Insight SA.
[LFS87] Kun-Shan Lin, G.A. Frantz, and R. Simar. The tms320 family of digital
signal processors. Proceedings of the IEEE, 75(9):1143–1159, 1987.
[LM03] Jeffrey R Lewis and Brad Martin. Cryptol: High assurance, retargetable
crypto development and validation. In IEEE Military Communications
Conference, 2003. MILCOM 2003., volume 2, pages 820–825. IEEE, 2003.
[Ma99] Yutai Ma. An effective memory addressing scheme for FFT processors. IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., 47(3):907–911, 1999.
56 BASALISC: Programmable Hardware Accelerator for BGV FHE
[MAK+
22] Ahmet Can Mert, Aikata, Sunmin Kwon, Youngsam Shin, Donghoon Yoo,
Yongwoo Lee, and Sujoy Sinha Roy. Medha: Microcoded hardware acceler-
ator for computing on encrypted data. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report
2022/480, 2022. https://ia.cr/2022/480.
[MÖS19] Ahmet Can Mert, Erdinç Öztürk, and Erkay Savas. Design and implementa-
tion of a fast and scalable ntt-based polynomial multiplier architecture. In
22nd Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design, DSD 2019, Kallithea,
Greece, August 28-30, 2019, pages 253–260. IEEE, 2019.
[PNPM15] Thomas Pöppelmann, Michael Naehrig, Andrew Putnam, and Adrian Macias.
Accelerating Homomorphic Evaluation on Reconfigurable Hardware. In
Tim Güneysu and Helena Handschuh, editors, Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems – CHES 2015, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
143–163, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015. Springer.
[PRR17] Yuriy Polyakov, Kurt Rohloff, and Gerard W Ryan. Palisade lattice cryptog-
raphy library user manual. 2017.
[RAD+
78] Ronald L Rivest, Len Adleman, Michael L Dertouzos, et al. On data banks and
privacy homomorphisms. Foundations of secure computation, 4(11):169–180,
1978.
[RLPD20] M. Sadegh Riazi, Kim Laine, Blake Pelton, and Wei Dai. HEAX: an architec-
ture for computing on encrypted data. In James R. Larus, Luis Ceze, and
Karin Strauss, editors, ASPLOS ’20: Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Lausanne, Switzerland, March 16-20, 2020,
pages 1295–1309. ACM, 2020.
[RMA+
21] Sujoy Sinha Roy, Ahmet Can Mert, Aikata, Sunmin Kwon, Youngsam Shin,
and Donghoon Yoo. Accelerator for computing on encrypted data. IACR
Cryptol. ePrint Arch., page 1555, 2021.
[RMD+
15] Stephen Richardson, Dejan Marković, Andrew Danowitz, John Brunhaver,
and Mark Horowitz. Building conflict-free fft schedules. IEEE Transactions
on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, 62(4):1146–1155, 2015.
[Ron20] Tom Rondeau. Data protection in virtual environments (DPRIVE), 2020.
[RV08] Dionysios I. Reisis and Nikolaos Vlassopoulos. Conflict-free parallel memory
accessing techniques for FFT architectures. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I
Regul. Pap., 55-I(11):3438–3447, 2008.
[RVM+
14] Sujoy Sinha Roy, Frederik Vercauteren, Nele Mentens, Donald Donglong
Chen, and Ingrid Verbauwhede. Compact ring-lwe cryptoprocessor. In
Lejla Batina and Matthew Robshaw, editors, Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems - CHES 2014 - 16th International Workshop, Busan, South
Korea, September 23-26, 2014. Proceedings, volume 8731 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 371–391. Springer, 2014.
[SEA22] Microsoft SEAL (release 4.0). https://github.com/Microsoft/SEAL,
March 2022. Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA.
[SFK+
21] Nikola Samardzic, Axel Feldmann, Aleksandar Krastev, Srinivas Devadas,
Ronald Dreslinski, Christopher Peikert, and Daniel Sanchez. F1: A fast and
programmable accelerator for fully homomorphic encryption. In MICRO-
54: 54th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture,
R. Geelen and M. Van Beirendonck et al. 57
MICRO ’21, page 238–252, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[SFK+
22] Nikola Samardzic, Axel Feldmann, Aleksandar Krastev, Nathan Manohar,
Nicholas Genise, Srinivas Devadas, Karim Eldefrawy, Chris Peikert, and
Daniel Sánchez. Craterlake: a hardware accelerator for efficient unbounded
computation on encrypted data. In Valentina Salapura, Mohamed Zahran,
Fred Chong, and Lingjia Tang, editors, ISCA ’22: The 49th Annual Inter-
national Symposium on Computer Architecture, New York, New York, USA,
June 18 - 22, 2022, pages 173–187. ACM, 2022.
[SRJV+
15] Sujoy Sinha Roy, Kimmo Järvinen, Frederik Vercauteren, Vassil Dimitrov,
and Ingrid Verbauwhede. Modular Hardware Architecture for Somewhat
Homomorphic Function Evaluation. In Tim Güneysu and Helena Handschuh,
editors, Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2015, Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, pages 164–184, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015.
Springer.
[SRJV+
18] Sujoy Sinha Roy, Kimmo Järvinen, Jo Vliegen, Frederik Vercauteren, and
Ingrid Verbauwhede. HEPCloud: An FPGA-Based Multicore Processor for
FV Somewhat Homomorphic Function Evaluation. IEEE Transactions on
Computers, 67(11):1637–1650, November 2018.
[SRTJ+
19] Sujoy Sinha Roy, Furkan Turan, Kimmo Jarvinen, Frederik Vercauteren, and
Ingrid Verbauwhede. FPGA-Based High-Performance Parallel Architecture for
Homomorphic Computing on Encrypted Data. In 2019 IEEE International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages
387–398, February 2019.
[SV14] Nigel P Smart and Frederik Vercauteren. Fully homomorphic simd operations.
Designs, codes and cryptography, 71(1):57–81, 2014.
[SYYT20] Yang Su, Bailong Yang, Chen Yang, and Luogeng Tian. Fpga-based hardware
accelerator for leveled ring-lwe fully homomorphic encryption. IEEE Access,
8:168008–168025, 2020.
[TL11] Pei-Yun Tsai and Chung-Yi Lin. A generalized conflict-free memory ad-
dressing scheme for continuous-flow parallel-processing FFT processors with
rescheduling. IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., 19(12):2290–2302,
2011.
[TRV20] Furkan Turan, Sujoy Sinha Roy, and Ingrid Verbauwhede. HEAWS: an
accelerator for homomorphic encryption on the amazon AWS FPGA. IEEE
Trans. Computers, 69(8):1185–1196, 2020.
[Zuc18] Vincent Zucca. Towards efficient arithmetic for Ring-LWE based homomorphic
encryption. PhD thesis, Sorbonne université, 2018.
