IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems
ISSN 2569-2925, Vol. 2023, No. 2, pp. 418–446. DOI:10.46586/tches.v2023.i2.418-446
Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel
Attacks on LWE-based KEMs - Parallel PC
Oracle Attacks on Kyber KEM and Beyond
Gokulnath Rajendran2
, Prasanna Ravi1,2
, Jan-Pieter D’Anvers3
, Shivam
Bhasin1
and Anupam Chattopadhyay1,2
1
Temasek Laboratories, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
imec-COSIC KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10 - bus 2452, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
gokulnat002@e.ntu.edu.sg prasanna.ravi@ntu.edu.sg
janpieter.danvers@esat.kuleuven.be sbhasin@ntu.edu.sg anupam@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract. In this work, we propose generic and novel adaptations to the binary
Plaintext-Checking (PC) oracle based side-channel attacks for Kyber KEM. These
attacks operate in a chosen-ciphertext setting, and are fairly generic and easy to
mount on a given target, as the attacker requires very minimal information about the
target device. However, these attacks have an inherent disadvantage of requiring a few
thousand traces to perform full key recovery. This is due to the fact that these attacks
typically work by recovering a single bit of information about the secret key per
query/trace. In this respect, we propose novel parallel PC oracle based side-channel
attacks, which are capable of recovering a generic P number of bits of information
about the secret key in a single query/trace. We propose novel techniques to build
chosen-ciphertexts so as to efficiently realize a parallel PC oracle for Kyber KEM. We
also build a multi-class classifier, which is capable of realizing a practical side-channel
based parallel PC oracle with very high success rate. We experimentally validated
the proposed attacks (upto P = 10) on the fastest implementation of unprotected
Kyber KEM in the pqm4 library. Our experiments yielded improvements in the range
of 2.89× and 7.65× in the number of queries, compared to state-of-the-art binary PC
oracle attacks, while arbitrarily higher improvements are possible for a motivated
attacker, given the generic nature of the proposed attacks. We further conduct a
thorough study on applicability to different scenarios, based on the presence/absence
of a clone device, and also partial key recovery. Finally, we also show that the
proposed attacks are able to achieve the lowest number of queries for key recovery,
even for implementations protected with low-cost countermeasures such as shuffling.
Our work therefore, concretely demonstrates the power of PC oracle attacks on Kyber
KEM, thereby stressing the need for concrete countermeasures such as masking for
Kyber and other lattice-based KEMs.
Keywords: lattice-based cryptography · Side-Channel Analysis · Kyber · Plaintext-
Checking Oracle · Chosen-Ciphertext Attack · Key Encapsulation Mechanism
1 Introduction
NIST very recently announced results for the third round of the Post-Quantum Cryptogra-
phy (PQC) standardization process [AAC+
22], in which CRYSTALS-Kyber [ABD+
21]
was selected as the sole candidate for standardization of Key Encapsulation Mechanisms
(KEMs). The security of Kyber is based on the well known Module Learning With Errors
(MLWE) problem, and served as one of the most promising candidates for KEMs in the
Licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0.
Received: 2022-10-15 Accepted: 2022-12-15 Published: 2023-03-06
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 419
NIST PQC process, owing to the confidence in its theoretical security guarantees, while
also offering one of the best implementation performance compared to other PQC based
KEMs [AASA+
20]. Thus, one can expect Kyber KEM to be implemented and designed
on a wide-variety of computational platforms and applications, in the coming years.
In this respect, security of Kyber against physical attacks such as Side-Channel Attacks
(SCA) naturally arises as an immediate concern, particularly for applications involving
embedded devices. NIST had also particularly encouraged more research on analysing
the security of PQC schemes against SCA [AASA+
20]. The cryptographic community
has shown significant interest towards research on development of new attacks on several
lattice-based schemes including Kyber KEM [RBRC21, RRCB20, BDH+
21], as well as
development of efficient side-channel protection techniques [HKL+
22,BGR+
21]. While
there exists a wide variety of SCA particularly on Kyber KEM, we observe that they can
be broadly classified into two main categories.
The first category of attacks only require a single trace or very few traces to perform
key recovery or message recovery [NDGJ21,RBRC21,ACLZ20]. However, these attacks
typically target very precise leakages from targeted operations within the scheme. They
typically require a fairly sophisticated setup, as well as a detailed knowledge of the target
device. Moreover, exploitation of such leakages on different implementations and targets,
is not very straightforward, and at the very least requires significant adaptations.
The second category of attacks are more generic, and exploit inherent vulnerabilities
in the algorithm for key recovery, while remaining relatively somewhat agnostic to the
target/implementation. These generic attacks typically work by querying the target device
with chosen-ciphertexts, and subsequently utilizing leakage from the decapsulation of
chosen-ciphertexts as an oracle, to recover information about the secret key [RRCB20,
UXT+
22,SCZ+
22]. However, such side-channel assisted chosen-ciphertext attacks typically
suffer from a disadvantage of requiring a few thousand queries for key recovery. In
particular, the attacks realizing such a Plaintext-Checking (PC) oracle typically exploit
1-bit of information about the secret key (i.e.) binary PC oracle, thereby requiring a few
thousand queries/traces for full key recovery. Thus, we observe a clear trade-off for both
the categories of attacks, based on the ease of mounting the attack versus number of traces
for key recovery.
In this work, we attempt to bridge this gap through our proposal of parallel PC oracle
attacks for LWE-based KEMs, with main focus on Kyber KEM. While all our attacks are
demonstrated on Kyber KEM, we believe our attack can be adapted to similar LWE/LWR-
based KEMs such as Saber [DKR+
20], FrodoKEM [ABD+
20] etc. The main contributions
of our work are as follows:
1. We propose generic and novel adaptations of side-channel assisted binary PC oracle-
based attacks, referred to as P-way parallel PC oracle attacks, which have the ability
to simultaneously recover an arbitrary P number of bits of information about the
secret key per query, while state-of-the-art PC oracle attacks are only capable of
extracting one bit per query.
2. We identify that existing approaches to construct chosen-ciphertext queries for
optimal key recovery in the case of binary PC oracle attacks, are not always optimal
for the proposed PC oracle attacks in the parallel setting. We therefore propose
improved constructions of Binary Decision Trees (BDTs) to identify lower bounds
for the number of queries for the proposed attacks.
3. We also adapt the binary side-channel classifiers used for the binary PC oracle attack,
to develop multi-class classifiers for an arbitrary 2P
number of classes to realize a
practical P-way parallel PC oracle. We practically validated that our multi-class
classifier is able to uniquely classify between 1024 classes (for P = 10) with 100%
420 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
success rate. While higher values of P are possible in theory, it is hard to estimate a
bound on the highest value of P that is possible to achieve in practice.
4. We experimentally validated our attacks on the fastest implementation of Kyber KEM
in the pqm4 library [KRSS19], a well known benchmarking and testing framework
for PQC schemes on the ARM Cortex-M4 microcontroller. We practically validated
improvements in the range of 2.89× and 7.65×, compared to state-of-the-art binary
PC oracle attacks. However, we note that significant improvements are possible as
shown later in the paper. Such improvements provide concrete inputs to a designer
for determining safe key refresh rates when ephemeral setting for key-exchange is
not possible.
5. We also conduct a comprehensive analysis of the capabilities of our attack in different
attack scenarios, based on (1) the presence/absence of a clone device and (2) partial
key recovery for attackers with different capabilites for offline computation. We
observe that our attack brings about arbitrarily high improvements in the number of
traces, especially when the attacker can construct a very high number of templates
on the clone device1
6. We also practically validated the applicability of our attacks to implementations
protected with low-cost countermeasures such as shuffling. Our attack yields the
lowest number of traces compared to existing state-of-the-art side-channel assisted
chosen-ciphertext attacks targeting the shuffled implementation of Kyber KEM.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Notation
We denote the ring of integers modulo q ∈ Z+
as Zq. Elements in Zq are denoted using
lower case letters (i.e.) a ∈ Zq, and the ith
bit of a ∈ Zq is denoted as ai. We use Rq to
denote the polynomial ring Zq[x]/(xn
+ 1) and polynomials in Rq are denoted using bold
lower case letters (i.e.) a ∈ Rq. The ith
coefficient of a ∈ Rq is denoted as a[i]. A vector of
polynomials in Rq (i.e.) Rk
q with k ∈ Z+
is denoted using bold lower case letters, while a
matrix of polynomials in Rk×`
q with (k, `) ∈ Z+
are denoted using bold upper case letters.
The ith
polynomial of a ∈ Rk
q is denoted as ai. Matrices and vectors of polynomials in
Rq are together referred to as modules. The product of two polynomials a and b in Rq is
denoted as c = a · b ∈ Rq, while pointwise multiplication using ◦ (i.e.) c = a ◦ b ∈ Rq.
Byte arrays of length n are denoted as Bn
. The transpose of a matrix A is denoted as AT
.
The NTT representation of a ∈ Rq is denoted as â ∈ Rq.
2.2 Kyber KEM
Kyber is a chosen-ciphertext secure KEM (IND-CCA), built upon the hardness of the
Module-LWE (MLWE) problem. It offers three parameter sets, hereby listed in increasing
levels of security - (1) Kyber-512 (NIST Security Level 1), (2) Kyber-768 (Level 3) and
(3) Kyber-1024 (Level 5) with k = 2, 3 and 4 respectively. The CCA secure Kyber KEM
is built upon a simpler chosen-plaintext secure PKE (IND-CPA), denoted as CPA.Kyber
PKE. Refer to Algorithm 1 for a simplified description of the key-generation (CPA.KeyGen),
encryption (CPA.Encrypt) and decryption procedures (CPA.Decrypt) of CPA.Kyber PKE.
SampleU is used to denote the operation sampling coefficients from a uniform distribution,
SampleB to denote sampling from a centered binomial distribution (CBD) and the function
1≈ 25× improvement for an arbitrarily strong attacker capable of constructing 232 templates on the
clone device
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 421
Expand, to denote expanding a small seed into a uniformly random matrix in Rk×k
q .
The function Compress(u, d) lossily compresses u ∈ Zq into v ∈ Z2d with q > 2d
, while
Decompress(v, d) extrapolates v ∈ Z2d into u0
∈ Zq.
Algorithm 1 CPA Secure Kyber PKE (Simplified)
1: procedure CPA.KeyGen
2: (seedA, seedB) ∈ B∗
← SampleU () . Generate uniform seeds seedA, seedB
3: Â ∈ Rk×k
q ← Expand(seedA) . Expand seedA into Â
4: s, e ∈ (Rk
q × Rq) ← SampleB(seedB, coins) . Sample s, e
5: ŝ ∈ Rk
q ← NTT(s); ê ∈ Rk
q ← NTT(e) . NTT(s), NTT(e)
6: t̂ = Â ◦ ŝ + ê . t = A · s + e in NTT domain
7: Return (pk = (seedA, t̂), sk = (ŝ))
8: end procedure
9: procedure CPA.Encrypt(pk, m ∈ {0, 1}256
, seedR ∈ {0, 1}256
)
10: Â ∈ Rk×k
q ← Expand(seedA)
11: r, e1, e2 ∈ (Rk
q × Rk
q × Rq) ← SampleB(seedR) . Sample r, e1, e2
12: r̂ ∈ Rk
q ← NTT(r) . NTT(r)
13: u ∈ Rk
q ← INTT(AT
◦ r̂) + e1 . u = AT
· r + e1
14: v0
∈ Rq ← INTT(t̂T
◦ r̂) + e2 . v0
= tT
· r + e2
15: v ∈ Rq ← v + Decompress(m, 1) . v = v + Encode(m)
16: Return ct = Compress(u, d1), Compress(v, d2)
17: end procedure
18: procedure CPA.Decrypt(sk, ct)
19: (u, v) ← Decompress(ct, d1, d2)
20: û = NTT(u)
21: m = v − INTT(û ◦ s) . m = v − u · s
22: m ∈ Rq ← Compress(m, 1) . Decoding m ∈ Rq into m ∈ B32
23: Return m
24: end procedure
2.2.1 IND-CCA Security
The IND-CPA secure PKE is transformed into an IND-CCA secure KEM using a post-
quantum variant of well-known Fujisaki-Okamoto transformation [FO99]. It involves the
use of two hash functions (H, G) and a key-derivation function KDF, forming a wrapper
denoted as encapsulation (CCA.Encaps) and decapsulation (CCA.Decaps) procedures of
CCA.Kyber KEM (Refer Alg.2).
Within this framework, the encryption procedure is deterministic and depends solely
on the message m for a given public key pk. This is done by ensuring that the seed input
r0
to the encryption procedure is derived by hashing m with pk (Line 4-5 in CCA.Encaps).
In the decapsulation procedure (CCA.Decaps), the decrypted message m is re-encrypted
(Line 12-13) to generate the ciphertext ct0
. The received ciphertext ct is compared with
ct0
, and the valid shared key is generated (Line 17) only if ct = ct0
, denoting a valid
ciphertext, else a pseudo-random key is generated (invalid ciphertext). This enables to
detect invalid/malicious ciphertexts, thereby offering concrete protection against chosen-
ciphertext attacks. We refer the reader to [ABD+
21] for more details on CCA secure
Kyber KEM.
422 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
Algorithm 2 CCA secure Kyber KEM
1: procedure CCA.Encaps(pk)
2: m ← {0, 1}256
3: m0
= H(m)
4: (K̄0, r0
) = G(m0
kH(pk)) . Generate K̄0 and r0
using m and pk
5: ct = CPA.Encrypt(pk, m0
, r0
)
6: K = KDF(K̄0kH(ct))
7: Return (ct, K)
8: end procedure
9: procedure CCA.Decaps(sk, ct)
10: (pk, H(pk), z) ← UnpackSK(sk)
11: m = CPA.Decrypt(sk, ct)
12: (K̄, r) = G(m, H(pk))
13: ct0
= CPA.Encrypt(pk, m, r) . Re_Encrypt(m, pk)
14: if (ct0
== ct) then
15: Return K = KDF(K̄kH(ct0
)) . Ciphertext Comparison Success
16: else
17: Return K = KDF(zkH(ct0
)) . Ciphertext Comparison Failure
18: end if
19: end procedure
2.3 Prior Side-Channel Attacks and Motivation
LWE/LWR-based KEMs including Kyber KEM have been subjected to a wide variety
of side-channel attacks whose primary target is the long-term secret key s used in the
decapulation procedure. Recovery of a single secret key s leads to compromise of all the
corresponding session keys K, that were derived using s.
In this respect, we can broadly classify existing attacks on Kyber KEM into two
categories: (1) Target Operation Independent attacks (TO_Indep) and (2) Target Operation
Dependent (TO_Dep) attacks. TO_Dep attacks are those that exploit side-channel leakage
from a specific targeted operation within the decapsulation procedure [XPR+
21,ACLZ20,
PPM17]. On the other hand, TO_Indep attacks are not limited to any single operation,
but can collectively exploit leakage from several operations within the decapsulation
procedure [RRCB20,DTVV19,GJN20]. Moreover, TO_Indep attacks are generic and to a
certain degree, agnostic to the target implementation, while TO_Dep attacks are more
specific to the target device/implementation.
2.3.1 Target Operation Independent Attacks (TO_Indep)
Several works have shown that an adversary with the ability to query the decapsulation
device with chosen-ciphertexts can amplify side-channel leakage related to the secret
key [RRCB20,DTVV19,GJN20]. The modus operandi of such attacks is as follows: The
attacker submits malformed ciphertexts ct to the decapsulation device, whose correspond-
ing decrypted message m has a close relation to the secet key s. An attacker who can
exploit side-channel leakage to recover information about m, in effect instantiates an or-
acle which leads to recovery of s. These attacks can be further classified into two categories:
Plaintext-Checking (PC) Oracle-based SCA: D’Anvers et al. [DTVV19] demon-
strated that chosen-ciphertexts can be constructed to restrict the decrypted message to a
only two possible values (i.e.) m = 0 or m = 1, with the value of m depending on targeted
single coefficients of s. They utilized the timing side-channel from variable time error
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 423
correcting codes, to recover m (i.e.) Time(ECC_Decode(0))! = Time(ECC_Decode(1)),
thereby instantiating a Plaintext-Checking (PC) oracle. Ravi et al. [RRCB20] subsequently
generalized the attack to multiple LWE/LWR-based KEMs including Kyber KEM through
the EM side-channel. They showed that a single bit change between m = 0 and m = 1
results in vastly different computations in the re-encryption procedure, which can be easily
distinguished in a single trace. Every chosen-ciphertext query only enables recovery of a
single bit information about the secret s, thus full key recovery is only possible in a few
thousand queries (≈ 2k − 3k).
Decryption-Failure (DF) Oracle-based SCA: These attacks work by submitting
perturbed ciphertexts ct0
= ctvalid +  to the target, which induce a decryption failure
depending on the value of the secret key s. An attacker who can detect a decryption failure
(i.e.) m = mvalid or m = minvalid can construct linear hints about the secret key, enabling
full key recovery in a few thousand queries (5k − 6k).
Guo et al. [GJN20] exploited variable time implementations of the ciphertext comparison
operation in the decapsulation procedure (Line 14 in CCA.Decaps of Alg.2) to instantiate a
DF oracle, while subsequent works [BDH+
21,DHP+
22] demonstrated exploitation of the
EM side-channel for key recovery. While these attacks specifically targeted the ciphertext
comparison operation for leakage, these attack can also exploit leakage from the entire
re-encryption procedure of an unprotected implementation, to easily distinguish between
Re − Encrypt(mvalid, pk) and Re − Encrypt(minvalid, pk).
In essence, all the aforementioned attacks recover upto a single bit information about the
secret key sk, thereby instantiating a binary oracle, which requires a few thousand queries
for key recovery. These attacks are particularly attractive for their inherent simplicity in
performing key recovery, where the attacker requires very minimal information about the
underlying target.
2.3.2 Target Operation Dependent Attacks (TO_Dep)
These attacks target leakage from specific leaky operations in the decapsulation procedure
for key recovery. We discuss two major types of attacks.
Targeting Message Encoding/Decoding Operation: Several attacks have targeted
the message encoding (Line 15 of CPA.Encrypt in Alg.1) and message decoding (Line
22 of CPA.Decrypt) operations, enabling recovery of the entire message m in a single
trace [ACLZ20,SKL+
20,RBRC21,NDJ21]. These attacks mainly exploit very fine leakages
from manipulations of single bits of the sensitive message m, enabling full message recovery.
Xu et al. [XPR+
21] showed that the aforementioned leakage can be exploited to instantiate
a Full Decryption (FD) oracle in a chosen-ciphertext setting. This enabled full key recovery
in only 6 queries for Kyber512. Adaptations of the same attack has also been demonstrated
on masked and shuffled implementations of Kyber KEM [NDJ21,NDGJ21].
While these attacks consume very few queries for full key recovery, they suffer from
inherent disadvantages. Firstly, they exploit very fine leakages from single bit manipula-
tions of the message. Thus, leakage is limited to single clock cycles or very few samples for
each message bit, thereby naturally being sensitive to acquisition noise (SNR), as shown in
[RBRC21]. Moreover, it is not clear if similar leakages can be exploited on complex devices
with features such as heavy parallelism, deep pipelining and inherent jitter, especially
given the sensitivity of these attacks to noise.
Targeting NTT Operation: Several attacks have targeted the Number Theoretic
Transform (NTT), used for polynomial multiplication in Kyber KEM [PPM17, PP19].
These attacks enable full key recovery in a single trace or very few traces, exploiting
advanced algebraic side-channel techniques. However, they also suffer from the same
424 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
disadvantages of exploiting fine leakages from multiple targeted instructions, while also
requiring a sophisticated setup or a powerful side-channel adversary for key recovery.
While improved attacks to counter noise have been demonstrated [HHP+
21], the attacks
still are relatively hard to implement. Moreover, the threat of the same attack on more
sophisticated platforms is not clear.
2.3.3 Trade-off In TO_Indep and TO_Dep Attacks
We observe a very clear trade-off between the ease of attack and the number of traces/queries
to perform full key recovery. While TO_Dep attacks only require a handful of traces for key
recovery, these attacks rely on very delicate leakages from targeted operations/instructions
for key recovery. However, TO_Indep attacks fall on the other side of the spectrum, with
respect to ease of key recovery. The attacks can exploit leakage from practically the entire
re-encryption procedure, but require traces/queries ranging in the few thousands for key
recovery. The number of queries is particularly important since refreshing the key pair
is a common strategy to reduce exposure of the key to possible classical/side-channel
attacks [RBRC21]. Thus, a natural question that arises is "whether it is possible to construct
attacks that can obtain the best of both worlds?" (i.e.) attacks that can exploit leakage
independent of the target operation, as well as enable efficient key recovery in very few
queries.
In this work, we answer this question positively by proposing generic and novel parallel
Plaintext-Checking (PC) oracle based attacks, bringing about significant improvement in
number of queries in key recovery, compared to the binary PC oracle attacks [RRCB20].
We lay main focus on improving the efficiency of simple and generic side-channel attacks
on unprotected implementations. Thus, masking is naturally out of scope of this paper.
Our work is motivated from the view point of a designer, contemplating the decision to use
heavy countermeasures such as masking for SCA protection of Kyber [HKL+
22,BGR+
21].
In this respect, our work attempts to answer the question: "what is the simplest and most
efficient attack on an unprotected implementation, with a basic SCA setup and very limited
knowledge about the target?.
The ephemeral setting for KEMs used for key-exchange is often recommended, where
the public-private key pair (pk, sk) is refreshed for every new key-exchange. However,
it is not always practical due to huge performance overhead of frequent key generation.
Thus, the static key setting with regular refreshment of the key pair is a more preferable
setting, where the public-private key pair (pk, sk) is refreshed once every X number of
key-exchanges, where X is chosen by the designer. Here, the static secret key sk is more
exposed to the attacker due to its use in multiple key-exchanges, compared to the ephemeral
setting. If an attacker is able to recover the secret key in Y number of key-exchanges where
Y < X, then the remaining Z = X − Y number of key-exchanges using the same secret
key sk with other legitimate devices are compromised. This is because all corresponding
session keys can be recovered with the knowledge of sk. Lower the value of Y , higher is the
number of session keys that can be compromised by the attacker for a given secret key sk.
In this context, our proposed attacks which improve upon the number of queries for key
recovery provide concrete inputs to a designer for choosing an appropriate key refresh rate.
As we show later in Section 5, the impact of our attacks depend upon different scenarios
such as availability of clone device, ability to perform offline computations after partial
key-recovery etc.
In this work, we primarily focus on unprotected implementations, but our proposed
attacks also perform better than existing attacks on lightly protected implementations
using countermeasures such as shuffling [RBRC21]. Refer to Fig.1 for an illustration of
a qualitative comparison of reported SCA applicable to Kyber, with respect to target
dependency and number of traces.
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 425
Figure 1: Qualitative comparison of reported SCA applicable to Kyber, with respect to
target dependency and number of traces. Due to lack of space, we do not list all the
attacks in the different categories
3 Improved PC Oracle-based CCA
3.1 Attacker Model
We assume that the attacker has physical access to the target device implementing the
decapsulation procedure of Kyber KEM. The attacker has the ability to query the target
device with chosen-ciphertexts ct of his/her choice. Moreover, prior knowledge of the secret
key of the DUT or detailed knowledge about the underlying implementation such as the
source code or compiled executable is not required. The attacker also does not require the
ability to profile the side-channel leakage of the Device Under Test (DUT) with known
keys. In the following, we explain the binary PC oracle attack of Ravi et al. [RRCB20] on
Kyber KEM, which serve as the basis of our improved attacks.
3.2 Binary PC Oracle-based CCA
The attack works by recovering the secret key one coefficient at a time. We therefore
demonstrate recovery of a single coefficient s[0], while other coefficients can be recovered
in a similar manner. For simplicity, we also assume that all the components are only
polynomials in Rq, however the same technique can be extended to higher dimensions (i.e.)
Rk
q .
3.2.1 Construction of Chosen-Ciphertexts
The attacker constructs chosen-ciphertexts ct = (u, v) ∈ (Rq × Rq) as u = ku · x0
and
v = kv · x0
where (ku, kv) ∈ Zq. The corresponding decrypted message m is given as:
mi =
(
Decode(kv − ku · s[0]) for i = 0
Decode(−ku · s[i]) for i ∈ {1, n − 1}
(1)
for i ∈ [0, n − 1]. Thus, every bit mi of the decrypted message is only dependent on the
corresponding secret coefficient s[i]. Now, the attacker can choose values for (ku, kv) such
426 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
that:
mi =
(
F(s[0]), if i = 0
0, for 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1
(2)
where m can only take two possible values (i.e.) m = 0 and m = 1 (all bits except LSB
have a value of 0). Moreover, m = 0/1 for a given ct, solely depends upon the value
of s[0]. Here, F represents the relation between the secret coefficient s[0] and mi such
that multiple values of the tuple (ku, kv) can uniquely identify the value of s[0] based
on the corresponding value of mi. In other words, the attacker needs to identify the
appropriate values for the tuple (ku, kv) such that the corresponding values for the message
bit mi = 0/1 serves as a binary distinguisher for s[0] based on m = 0/1. Thus, the value
of mi = 0/1 serves as a binary plaintext checking (PC) oracle for the attacker to obtain
information about the secret coefficient s[0].
An attacker who can instantiate such a binary PC oracle through side-channels can
uniquely recover the secret coefficient s[0]. Similarly, other coefficients can be recovered by
exploiting the rotational property of polynomial multiplication in the ring Rq. Multiplying
r ∈ Rq with xp
rotates r by p positions in an anti-cyclic fashion [RRCB20]. Thus, for the
chosen-ciphertext u = ku · xp
and v = kv · x0
with p ∈ Z+
, the first message bit m0 is
given as:
m0 =
(
kv − ku · s[0], if p = 0
kv − ku · (−s[n − p]), for 1 ≤ p ≤ n − 1
(3)
while the other bits are fixed to a value of 0. Thus, changing the parameter p ensures that
m0 depends upon different secret coefficients of s, which can also be recovered in the same
manner as s[0].
3.2.2 Instantiating Binary PC Oracle through SCA
A close observation of the decapsulation procedure (CCA.Decaps in Alg.2) reveals that
the decrypted message m is hashed with the public-key (G in Line 12), and its result r
along with the message m is fed into the re-encryption procedure (Line 13). For brevity,
we denote these operations together as Re_Encrypt(m, pk). This re-encryption procedure
is deterministic and solely depends upon m for a given public key pk. Thus, a single bit
difference between m = 0 and m = 1 induces very different computations throughout the
re-encryption procedure. This amounts to a few thousand leaky Points of Interest (PoI)
which can be used to easily distinguish between m = 0 and m = 1, thereby instantiating a
binary PC oracle.
3.3 Optimizing the Number of Queries for Key-Recovery
Ravi et al. [RRCB20] targeted the Round 2 specification of Kyber512 with secret coefficients
in [−2, 2]. They utilized a non-adaptive approach to query the decapsulation device with
chosen-ciphertexts, thereby using 5 ciphertexts to recover a single coefficient in [−2, 2],
which is clearly suboptimal. Thus, subsequent works [BDHD+
19, HDV20] proposed
improved adaptive attacks to reduce the number of queries for key recovery. The most
recent work of Qin et al. [QCZ+
21] proposed a systematic approach to find the lower
bounds for the number of queries. They propose to build a Binary Decision Tree (BDT),
which can be traversed based on the oracle’s responses m = 0/1 to efficiently recover the
correct coefficient.
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 427
Figure 2: Optimal BDT for Kyber512 to minimise Qbin for binary PC oracle-based CCA
3.3.1 Construction of an Optimal BDT
The core idea to construct an optimal BDT is based on the observation that the secret
coefficients of Kyber follow a non-uniform CBD distribution. Thus, the optimal minimum
for queries can be attained by constructing a non-uniform distinguisher with the following
strategy: higher the frequency of a secret coefficient candidate, lower should be the number
of queries for unique distinguishability. Thus, the number of queries to uniquely recover a
candidate is inversely proportional to the probability of its occurrence.
Figure 3: Optimal BDT for Kyber768, Kyber1024 to minimise Qbin for binary PC oracle-
based CCA
Let qx denote the number of queries to uniquely distinguish s[i] = x, and Pr(x) denote
the probability that a secret coefficient s[i] = x. Then, the objective is to build a BDT
that yields a minimum for Qbin which is given as:
Qbin =
i=η
X
i=−η
qx · Pr(x) (4)
We adopted the technique of Qin et al. [QCZ+
21] to construct BDTs for all parameter
sets of Kyber. For our chosen-ciphertexts, we choose (ku, kv) = (208, 208 · t) where t ∈ Z+
.
428 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
Refer to Figure.2 for the corresponding optimal BDT for Kyber512 with Qbin = 2.5625,
distinguishing every candidate in [−3, 3] in not more than 4 queries. A node, edge and
leaf of the BDT denotes a chosen-ciphertext query, oracle response and a recovered secret
coefficient respectively. The optimal BDT for Kyber768 and Kyber1024 (with coefficients
in [−2, 2]) is shown in Figure.3, with Qbin = 2.3125. Thus, the average number of queries
for full key recovery is given as:
Qattack = 28
· k · Qbin (5)
Thus, Qattack amounts to 1312, 1776 and 2368 for Kyber512, Kyber768 and Kyber1024
respectively. We refer to the constructed trees as BDTmin_ent, since the minimum average
number of queries is very similar to computation of a certain Shannon entropy.
3.3.2 Critical Observations on the Binary PC Oracle-based CCA
We make two critical observations on the binary PC oracle CCA.
1. Observation-1: The decrypted message m for the chosen-ciphertexts only contains
a single secret dependent message bit (i.e.) m0 = 0/1, while all other bits mi = 0
∀ i = {1, n − 1}.
2. Observation-2: Leakage from the entire re-encryption procedure has only been
exploited to recover a single bit of m, and therefore the secret key s, especially when
there are a few thousand leakage points [RRCB20].
This motivates us to investigate if it is possible to recover multiple bits of information
about the secret key, exploiting leakage from the re-encryption procedure in a generic
manner. In the following, we propose novel extensions of the binary PC oracle attack,
which parallelize secret key recovery in a generic and configurable manner. This yields
significant improvements in the possible lower bounds achievable for key recovery.
3.4 Parallel PC Oracle-based CCA
The core idea of our attack lies in constructing ciphertexts, such that multiple targeted bits
of the message m (i.e.) mi for i ∈ {0, P − 1} (P ∈ Z+
) depend upon the P corresponding
coefficients of the secret key. To achieve the same, we choose u = 208 · x0
(i.e.) ku = 208
and v = 208 · t · (
Pi=(P −1)
i=0 xi
) where t ∈ Z+
(i.e.) kv = 208 · t. We explain our choice for
the exact value for (u, v) later in this section. Thus, the decrypted message m is given as:
mi =
(
Decode(208 · t − 208 · s[i]), if i ∈ [0, P − 1]
Decode(−208 · s[i]), for i ∈ [P, n − 1]
(6)
For the same values of t used to build the optimal BDT (Fig.2-3), the decrypted message
m is given as:
mi =
(
F(s[i]), if i ∈ [0, P − 1]
0, for i ∈ [P, n − 1]
(7)
Thus, the first P bits of m are now dependent on the corresponding coefficients of s, while
all the other bits are fixed to 0. This technique is subtly different from attacks exploiting
the Full-Decryption (FD) oracle [XPR+
21,RBRC21], where all the bits of m are dependent
on the corresponding coefficients of s. However, our technique allows us to control the
number and position of the secret dependent message bits. As seen later in Sec.4, this
nuanced difference in approach allows to exploit leakage from the re-encryption procedure,
in a parallel as well as generic manner.
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 429
An adversary able to recover the correct value of the message (i.e.) m ∈ [0, 2P
− 1]
can simultaneously recover a configurable P bits of information about s. While the binary
PC oracle attack traverses one BDT in a single query (Fig.2-3), our attack allows us
to simultaneously traverse P distinct BDTs (BDTi for i ∈ [0, P − 1]) in a single query,
where each BDTi is traversed using the corresponding message bit mi. This simultaneous
traversal of P BDTs for P message bits mi for i ∈ [0, P − 1] is made possible due to the
choice of our chosen-ciphertexts. In particular, the value of the ciphertext component u is
fixed to u = 208 · x0
, while the coefficients of the ciphertext component v (i.e.) the value
of t for v[i] = 208 · t with i ∈ [0, P − 1], can be decided based on the traversed node of the
corresponding BDT (i.e.) BDTi and the corresponding message bit mi. We exhaustively
searched for a single value for the non-zero coefficient of u (i.e.) ku such that, simply
changing v can yield different oracle responses to uniquely identify all possible values for
the secret coefficients. In this manner, the traversal of all the P BDTs for the message
bits mi for i ∈ [0, P − 1] can be made completely independent of one-another.
Thus, a generic number of P secret coefficients can be simultaneously recovered in not
more than 4 queries for Kyber512 using BDTmin_ent (Figure.2). Similarly, P secret coeffi-
cients can be simultaneously recovered in not more than 3 queries for Kyber768, Kyber1024
using BDTmin_ent (Figure.3). Similar to the binary attack, the rotational property of
polynomial multiplication can be used to recover different P coefficients at a time, thereby
recovering the full key. We refer to P as the parallelization factor and our attack as the
P-way parallel PC oracle attack.
3.5 Optimal Key Recovery for P -way Parallel Attack
While the approach of Qin et al. [QCZ+
21] yields the lower bound for queries for the
binary attack, it is not clear if it is optimal in the P-way parallel attack. Our intuition is
based on the following observation. If we utilize BDTmin_ent (Figure.2) for a 2-way parallel
attack on Kyber512, then recovering two coefficients with a value of (0, 0) simultaneously,
only requires two queries. However, pairs with values of (−2, 0) or (−3, 0), can only be
recovered in 4 queries, since −2 and −3 occur at a higher depth in the BDT. Thus, the
number of queries to recover a given set of P random coefficients depends upon that
coefficient in the set, with the maximum depth in the BDT. Moreover, increasing the
parallelization factor P, only increases the probability of observing coefficients with a
higher depth (e.g.) −2, −3, leading to increase in average number of queries to recover a
given set of P coefficients.
3.5.1 More efficient BDTs for the P -way Parallel Attack
This leads us to hypothesize if BDTs with a lower depth yield lower average number of
queries for the P-way parallel attack, in particular for higher values of P. We refer to
Eqn.6 to construct our chosen-ciphertexts. After careful consideration of all possible values
of t and corresponding mi, we construct a BDT with a depth of 3 (Figure.4), which is
the lowest achievable depth for unique distinguishability of coefficients in [−3, 3]. We also
verified that it is not possible to build a BDT, with lower entropy and a depth of 3. We
refer to this alternate tree as BDTmin_depth.
We now derive an expression to compute the average number of queries to recover a
set of P random coefficients for a generic BDT. We introduce some notation to explain
our analysis. Refer to Figure.5 for the corresponding illustration of the same. We use
subtree to denote a tree with smaller depth starting from the root. We use the notation
std to denote a subtree with depth d where the depth of the root node is 0. So, for any
BDT with maximum depth d, there are d + 1 such subtrees (i.e.) {st0, st1, . . . , std}. We
denote the set of subtrees that contain at least a single leaf (recovered coefficient) as V.
The set of leaves in a given sub-tree sti is denoted as Lsti and specifically the leaves in the
430 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
last layer of the subtree are denoted as Msti
. The average number of queries required to
recover all P coefficients using the tree BDT denoted as Qset is therefore given as:
Qset =
X
∀sti∈V
i · Ri (8)
where Ri denotes the probability that a set of random P coefficients belong to Lsti
, with
at least one coefficient in the set Msti
. With knowledge about the apriori distribution of
the secret coefficients, it is possible to compute Qset for any given BDT.
Note that it might be possible to obtain a more efficient tree using all possible P-tuples
and not splitting into 2 branches after each node, but instead splitting into 2P
branches.
While this approach might slightly further reduce the number of queries needed during
the attack, it requires a much higher number of templates (one for each node). As such,
trying to reach the optimal BDT-mindepth in the P > 1 scenario is not always desirable.
Refer to Figure.6 for the plot of Qset for different values of P for Kyber512, for both
BDTmin_ent (Figure.2) and BDTmin_depth (Figure.4). We can clearly see that Qset for
our proposed BDTmin_depth graph is lower than that of BDTmin_ent for P ≥ 3, thereby
confirming our hypothesis. Thus, our proposed BDT (i.e.) BDTmin_depth clearly yields
fewer number of queries for Kyber512, compared to BDTmin_ent for P ≥ 3. For the case of
Kyber768 and Kyber1024, the secret coefficients lie in the span of [−2, 2]. Moroever, the
same BDT used for the binary PC oracle attack (i.e.) BDTmin_ent in Fig.3 can be used for
both Kyber768 and Kyber1024. The BDT has the minimum possible achievable depth of
Figure 4: Optimal BDT (BDTmin_depth) for P-way parallel oracle attack on Kyber512
Figure 5: Illustration for calculation of Qset (i.e.) average number of queries to recover P
coefficients for a given BDT
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 431
3. Since the BDT already has the lowest entropy as well as minimum depth, BDTmin_ent
yields the lowest number of queries for the P-way parallel attack, for both Kyber768 and
Kyber1024 (i.e.) BDTmin_ent = BDTmin_depth. This therefore yields the same value for Qset,
for both Kyber768 and Kyber1024 as shown in Fig.6.
Putting it all together, if an adversary has access to a perfect P-way PC oracle, then
the average number of queries for full key recovery, denoted as Qattack is given as:
Qattack = d
28
P
e · k · Qset (9)
Refer to Figure.7 for Qattack versus the parallelization factor P, for all parameter sets
of Kyber. Our experimental simulations assuming a perfect P-way parallel PC oracle
yielded a 100% success rate in recovering the secret key for a generic value of P. In the
following, we demonstrate that an attacker can realize a very efficient and practical P-way
parallel PC oracle through exploitation of side-channel leakage from the re-encryption
procedure.
4 Realizing a Side-Channel based P -way Parallel PC Ora-
cle
4.1 Experimental Setup
Our Device Under Test (DUT) is the STM32F407VG microcontroller, mounted on the
STM32F4DISCOVERY evaluation board. We target the fastest implementation of Kyber
KEM (m4speed version), taken from the public pqm4 library [KRSS19], a benchmarking
and testing framework for PQC schemes on the 32-bit ARM Cortex-M4 microcontroller.
The target is clocked at 24 MHz. We utilize the Electromagnetic Emanation (EM) side-
channel for our experiments. We obtain EM leakage using a near-field EM probe mounted
on top of the chip, with the measurements collected on a Lecroy HD6104 oscilloscope,
using a sampling rate of 250 MSam/sec, amplified 30dB with a pre-amplifier.
Kyber512,BDTmin_depth
Kyber512,BDTmin_ent
Kyber768/1024,BDTmin_depth
Figure 6: Average number of queries to recover P coefficients (i.e.) Qset versus the
parallelization factor P, for all parameter sets of Kyber
432 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
,BDTmin_depth
,BDTmin_depth
Figure 7: Average number of queries Qattack for full key recovery, versus parallelization
factor P for all parameter sets of Kyber
4.2 Side-Channel Methodology
Our task is to build a side-channel classifier for m ∈ [0, 2P
− 1], using leakage from the
re-encryption procedure (i.e.) Re_Encrypt(m, pk). While prior works [RRCB20,QCZ+
21]
utilized the same leakage to distinguish between m = 0 and m = 1, we demonstrate that
it is possible to classify an arbitrary number of values for m with a very high accuracy.
Figure 8: Welch’s t-test plot computed for Tr0 and Tr1 for Kyber768
4.2.1 Building a Multi-Class Side-Channel Classifier
Our approach for multi-class classification, builds upon the binary classification approach
using the well-known Welch’s t-test [RRCB20]. We will briefly explain the binary classifi-
cation method, and subsequently explain our generic extensions to arbitrary 2P
number of
classes.
The binary classification is done in two phases: (1) Pre-Processing Phase and (2) Clas-
sification Phase. The pre-processing phase involves construction of side-channel templates
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 433
for each class 0 and 1. The subsequent classification phase uses the templates to classify
a given side-channel trace into one of the 2 classes. At no point during any of the two
phases, does the attacker require to operate the target device with known secret keys.
Pre-Processing Phase: The adversary obtains T repeated measurements corresponding
to Re_Encrypt(m, pk) for both m = 0 and m = 1. This is done by repeatedly querying
the decapsulation device with valid ciphertexts for m = 0 and m = 1 (T times each). We
denote the trace set for m = i as Tri, and the complete trace set as Tr = ∪i=1
i=0Tri. The
number of repeated measurements T is a parameter of the experimental setup.
• Every trace trj in Tr is normalized by removing the mean and dividing by its standard
deviation to obtain t0
j.
• The Welch’s t-test is computed between Tr0 and Tr1 to detect univariate leakage,
based on Equation (10).
t-value =
µ1 − µ2
r
σ2
1
T
+
σ2
2
T
(10)
where µi and σi are the mean and standard deviation of trace set Tri.
Refer to Figure.8 for the t-test plot between Tr0 and Tr1 for Kyber768 (T = 20
traces). The plot shows several peaks about the t-test threshold of ±5, clearly
indicating significant difference between the two computations. In particular, there
are two distinct peaks (over multiple samples) with very high t-test values. Upon
inspection, we identified it to be the sampling of polynomials of r from the CBD
distribution (Line 11 of CPA.Encrypt in Alg.1). The attacker however does not require
this information to perform the attack.
• Those features/points whose absolute t-test value is greater than a chosen threshold
ThPoI are selected as the Points of Interest (PoI) set, denoted as P. We do not have
other criteria, apart from the t-test value to select the PoI. The threshold value ThPoI
is also a parameter of the experimental setup and is empirically determined.
• The set P is used to derive a reduced trace set for each class, which we denote as
Tr0
i for i ∈ {0, 1}, and the mean of the reduced trace set Tr0
i is the reduced template
m(i,P) for class i with i ∈ {0, 1}.
Thus, the reduced templates m(i,P) for i ∈ {0, 1} are the output of the pre-processing
phase. Since the target operation Re_Encrypt(m, pk) depends upon both the message m
and the public key pk, the pre-processing phase is not one-time, and therefore has to be
carried out for every new public key.
Classification Phase: The reduced templates obtained from the pre-processing phase
are now used to classify a given trace tr for a chosen-ciphertext, into either m = 0/1. The
trace tr is first normalized, and the reduced trace t0
P is obtained. Then, the sum-of-squared
difference Γ∗ is computed with the reduced template of each class m(i,P) for i ∈ {0, 1} as
follows:
Γ0 = (t0
P − m0,P )>
· (t0
P − m0,P ) and Γ1 = (t0
P − m1,P )>
· (t0
P − m1,P ). (11)
The trace tr belongs to the class with the least sum-of-squared difference (i.e.) Class(tr) = 0
if Γ0 < Γ1, else Class(tr) = 1. Thus, a single side-channel trace can be used to distinguish
between the two classes m = 0 and m = 1, thereby instantiating a binary PC oracle.
434 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
Refer to Figure.9 which shows clear distinguishability of a sample trace tr into either of
the two classes. The figures only show a short segment of the reduced trace for better
visual distinguishability, while the reduced templates used for our experiments span a few
hundreds to few thousand points. We were able to obtain a 100% success rate for the
binary classification m = 0/1, as also shown in Figure.9.
(a) Class(tr) = 0 (b) Class(tr) = 1
Figure 9: Matching the reduced attack trace tr0
with the reduced templates of the two
classes m = 0 and m = 1
Figure 10: Illustration to classify the attack trace tr among 8 classes, m = [0,7]
4.2.2 Towards Multi-Class Classification
Our approach towards multi-class classification is based on the observation that it is
possible to classify any two random values of m in the same manner, as m = 0/1. This is
rendered possible due to the diffusion property of hash functions used in the re-encryption
procedure. For an illustration, refer to Figure.11 for the t-test based binary classification
between m = 330 and m = 559, as illustration. It is well known that unique identification
of a particular candidate within a group is possible, if there exists a pairwise classifier for
every possible pair of candidates [KU02]. For a P-way parallel PC oracle attack, there are
2P
possible classes for m. Thus, if we are able to classify between any two pairs of m with
m ∈ [0, 2P
− 1], it is also possible to uniquely identify the value of m. This applies for any
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 435
generic value of P. Thus, the P-way parallel PC oracle can be realized in two phases in
the following manner.
Pre-Processing Phase: The adverary collects T repeated measurements corresponding
to Re_Encrypt(m, pk) for all 2P
values of m ∈ [0, 2P
− 1]. The complete trace set for all
classes is denoted as Tr = ∪i=2P
−1
i=0 Tri.
Classification Phase: Given an attack trace tr, the adversary uses pairwise binary
classification similar to a knock-out tournament with 2P
players. The correct class (resp.
winner) is selected after (2P
− 1) pairwise classifications (resp. matches). A match in this
context is nothing but binary classification of a given trace tr between two classes m = x
and m = y, which is denoted as Classify(x, y). Refer to Figure.10 for an illustration for 8
classes (i.e.) m = [0, 7], where the attack trace tr corresponds to m = 6.
(a) t-test (b) Class(tr) = 330
Figure 11: t-test plot and matching a given reduced attack trace tr0
correponding to class
330, against reduced templates for classes 330 and 559
This approach only requires h − 1 pairwise binary classifications for h classes, and
is optimal in terms of the number of pairwise classifications necessary for unique distin-
guishability. There is another costlier approach, of doing pairwise classification of all
possible pairs of classes and adopting a majority voting approach to select the correct
class. However, this yields a much higher h2
binary classifications for h classes. Thus,
we adopt the former and more efficient approach for classification. The aforementioned
technique yields the correct candidate as long as the correct candidate for m is correctly
classified, when paired with any other value of m ∈ [0, 2P
− 1]. This is similar to the case
of having a player, who is capable of winning against any other player in the tournament,
and therefore emerges as the winner.
4.2.3 Experimental Validation
We validated our proposed attack on the speed optimized implementation of Kyber768
from the pqm4 library (Refer Sec.4.1 for the experimental setup). We were able to achieve
full key recovery with 100% success rate for a parallelization factor of P = 10 (1024 classes).
We utilize T = 5 traces to build templates for each class, which amounts to 5520 traces.
While this is the maximum value of P used for our experiments, it is possible to increase P
to any arbitrary value. In this respect, we also verified the success of binary classification
of several pairs of messages with P = 12 (i.e.) which amounts to 4096 classes. We were
able to classify all the collected pairs correctly with 100% accuracy.
436 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
The achieved success rate significantly depends upon the the experimental setup, and
particularly the SNR of the collected traces. For success rates below 100% due to the effect
of random noise, it is possible to utilize majority voting based on multiple traces or utilize
error correcting codes to encode the oracle responses as shown in [NDGJ21,SCZ+
22] to
enhance the success rate. Nevertheless, our experiments provide sufficient evidence that
there is enough information in the leakage available from the re-encryption procedure, that
allows to recover a generic P bits of information about the secret key, while prior works
[RRCB20] underutilized leakage from the re-encryption procedure to only recover a single
bit. This is also due to the fact that there are several hundred PoIs for classification, to
distinguish any pair of values for m.
We also believe that an upper limit for P for perfect classification if exists, is challenging
to determine through experiments. It depends upon a variety of factors such as the target
device and target implemenation, Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) etc. Thus, it can only be
determined empirically by attempting key recovery for different values of P, which we
leave for future work. However, we show later in Section 5, that arbitrarily increasing P
also exponentially increases the number of traces for the pre-processing phase, thereby
decreasing the relevance of the attack. Moreover, we can see that our proposed attack
is generic and clearly agnostic to the target implementation, and requires almost no
information about the design of the target.
5 Evaluating Total Cost for Key Recovery
From an attacker’s perspective, the number of queries is the primary cost of the attack, as
he/she looks for key recovery with minimum possible interaction with the target device.
The cost of key recovery, therefore includes the number of queries for the pre-processing
phase denoted as Qtemplate, as well as for the classification phase, denoted as Qattack. The
pre-processing phase requires T queries for each of the 2P
classes, which amounts to 2P
· T
queries. The number of queries in the classification phase is nothing but the total number
of chosen-ciphertext queries for key recovery (Refer Eqn.8 and Fig.7 in Sec.3.4). Thus, the
total number of queries for key recovery denoted as Qtotal is given as:
Qtotal = Qtemplate + Qattack (12)
= 2P
· T + d
28
P
e · k · Qset (13)
5.1 Analysis for Partial Key Recovery
In a bid to reduce the number of traces, an attacker can also resort to recovering m < (k·n)
coefficients of Kyber, and recovering the remaining coefficients using suitable lattice-based
solvers in an offline manner. In this respect, we consider three possible cases for an attacker
with differing capabilities to perform offline computations:
1. Full_Recovery - Full Key Recovery with 0 remaining offline computations.
2. Partial_Recovery_232
- Partial Key Recovery with 232
remaining offline computations.
3. Partial_Recovery_264
- Partial Key Recovery with 264
remaining offline computations.
We utilized the leaky LWE estimator developed by Dachman-Soled et al. [DSDGR20]
to estimate the number of coefficients to be recovered, to reduce the security strength of
Kyber to 232
and 264
respectively. The tool allows us to include exact or approximate
hints and estimate the remaining cost to recover the secret. Refer to Table.1 for the exact
number of coefficients to be recovered for the aforementioned attacker scenarios.
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 437
Table 1: Number of coefficients to be recovered, for scenarios considering attackers with
different offline computational capabilities
Full_Recovery Partial_Recovery_232
Partial_Recovery_264
Kyber512 512 354 184
Kyber768 768 667 463
Kyber1024 1024 1010 782
5.2 On the Presence of Clone Device
A close observation of Eqn.13 to calculate the total number of queries Qtotal reveals that
the cost of pre-processing phase to generate templates cannot be ignored, especially given
that the pre-processing phase is required to be done for every new public key. In this
respect, we identify two possible scenarios, with respect to whether or not the adversary
has access to a clone device.
5.2.1 With Clone Device
In this scenario, the adversary has access to a clone device. Thus, he/she can generate
templates for Re_Encrypt(m, pk) from the clone device, since the computations only depend
upon known values to the attacker (i.e.) m and pk. Thus, the pre-processing phase is
completely taken offline. By offline, we mean that templates can be captured on the clone
device, and the attacker only requires to capture traces from the target device for the key
recovery phase. In this case, the number of queries to the target device, denoted as Qtarget
is nothing but:
Qtarget = Qattack (14)
= d
28
P
e · k · Qset (15)
Here, Qtemplate = 0 since the pre-processing phase is carried out on the clone device.Thus,
Qtarget simply scales inversely with the parallelization factor P. Thus, the lower bound for
Qtarget is only limited by the parallelization factor P achievable on the given target device.
We however recall that finding the exact limit on P is very hard to achieve in practice.
Refer to Figure.13(a) for the plot of number of queries to the target versus P for
Kyber768, considering both full key recovery and partial key recovery. We can clearly see
that the number of queries scales inversely with increase in P. For the experimentally
verified case of P = 10, the attacker requires ≈ 232 queries for full key recovery, which
improves over the state-of-the-art binary PC oracle attack [QCZ+
21] by a factor of ≈ 7.6×.
(Arbitarily) Best Case Scenario: We also consider an arbitarily strong attacker
capable of building 232
templates on the clone device. In this case, full key recovery is
possible in just 72 queries, which is an improvement by a factor of ≈ 24.6 compared to the
binary PC oracle attack. Naturally, we also observe better improvements for the case of
partial key recovery as seen in Table.2.
5.2.2 Without Clone Device
In this scenario, the adversary does not have access to a clone device. Recall that our
attack is possible even without knowledge of the key in pre-processing phase. Thus, both
the pre-processing as well as classification phase has to be carried out directly on the target
438 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
Figure 12: Total number of queries required for full key recovery for Kyber768 in the
Scenario_Without_Clone versus the parallelization factor P, for different values of T, where
T is the number of traces per template
device. Here Qtarget is nothing but:
Qtarget = Qtemplate + Qattack (16)
= 2P
· T + d
28
P
e · k · Qset (17)
We can observe that Qtemplate scales exponentially with P (i.e.) 2P
and also increases
linearly with T (number of traces per template), while Qattack scales inversely with P.
Thus, there exists a fine trade-off between the cost of pre-processing and classification
phase. It is not possible to arbitrarily increase P to improve Qtarget, as the cost of the
pre-processing phase outweighs the cost of the classification phase for higher values of P,
unlike when attacker has access to clone device. Refer to Figure.12 for the plot of number
of queries versus the parallelization factor P, for different values of T. As expected, we
observe a certain minima for number of queries for each value of T ∈ [1, 10].
We experimentally verified that full key recovery is possible with T = 5. For T = 5,
the parallelization factor P = 4 yields the lowest number of queries (i.e.) 613. This is an
improvement by a factor of ≈ 2.89× compared to the binary PC oracle attack. However, a
lower value for T could be achieved with a better experimental setup with low acquisition
noise. For the best possible scenario of T = 1 (single trace per template), the parallelization
factor P = 6 yields the lowest number of queries (i.e.) 437, an improvement factor of ≈ 4×
compared to the binary PC oracle attack. Refer to Figure.13(b) for the number of queries
versus P, for T = 5, for both full key recovery and partial key recovery.
5.3 Extensions to Lightly Protected Implementations
Given the heavy performance penalty of masking countermeasures for LWE/LWR-based
KEMs with upto 3.1× in runtime as shown in [BGR+
21], there is significant interest in
low-cost countermeasures to offer protection against known side-channel attacks. One
such approach is the shuffling countermeasure, which was proposed to protect the message
encoding procedure against single trace message recovery attacks [ACLZ20, SKL+
20].
Moreover, leakage from the message encoding procedure was also shown to be exploitable
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 439
(a)
(b)
Figure 13: Estimates for the total number of queries to the target versus the parallelization
factor P for Kyber768 (a) With clone device and (b) Without clone device, and also
considering partial key recovery and full key recovery
for key recovery through the Full-Decryption (FD) oracle attack in [XPR+
21]. These
attacks are capable of recovering 256 bits of information from a single trace, thereby capable
of message recovery in potentially less than 10 traces on unprotected implementations of
Kyber KEM, especially in presence of sufficiently high SNR.
In this respect, shuffling was proposed as a concrete countermeasure against attacks
targeting the message encoding procedure. Shuffling ensures that the attacker can still
recover all the 256 bits of the message, but not its correct order, thereby offering protection
against message recovery and also removing the presence of the FD oracle. However,
Ravi et al. [RBRC21] showed an attack on shuffling countermeasure in a chosen-ciphertext
setting and recover 1 targeted message bit per query. While shuffling does not offer concrete
protection, it at least prevents single trace message recovery, and reduces the attacker’s
capability to only recover a single bit per query, which is equivalent to a binary PC oracle
attack. This is the best known attack on such a lightly protected shuffled implementation
of Kyber KEM. Thus, a simple shuffling countermeasure on the message encoding operation
is able to increase the attacker’s effort from recovering the secret key in < 10 traces to a
few thousand traces.
440 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
Table 2: Tabulation of the total number of queries for key recovery for Kyber768,
considering attack scenarios with respect to clone device, as well as the attacker’s offline
computational capability.
Parallelization Factor P
With Clone Without Clone
1 10 12 32 4 (T=5) 6 (T =1)
Full_Recovery 1776 232 197 72 613 437
Partial_Recovery_232
1545 202 170 63 544 388
Partial_Recovery_264
1073 140 120 45 402 290
However, we observe that our proposed parallel PC oracle attack is independent of
leakage from the shuffled message encoding operation. In fact, for our experiments on the
unprotected implementation, we utilized leakage only until sampling of the ephemeral secret
module r during the re-encryption procedure (Line 11 of CPA.Encrypt in Alg.1). Thus, we
do not utilize leakage from the message encoding operation for our practical experiments.
Thus, we hypothesize that our attack can defeat the lightly protected implementation with
the shuffled message encoding operation, in the same manner as that of the unprotected
implementation.
5.3.1 Experimental Results
We mounted our parallel PC oracle attack on the decapsulation procedure of Kyber
KEM, with a shuffled message encoding procedure. Confirming our hypothesis, we
were able to successfully recover the secret key in the same manner as the unprotected
implementation. The number of traces for key recovery, remains the same as that of our
attack on the unprotected implementation. We also experimentally validated the capability
to exhaustively recover all 2P
possible values of the decrypted message for a parallelization
factor of P = 10, and we were able to correctly distinguish all classes only using single
trace, thereby concretely demonstrating the ability to distinguish between 2P
possible
values of the decrypted message. Figure.14 shows the t-test based classification between
m = 3097 and m = 4000, as illustration for our attack on the shuffling countermeasure.
Thus, our parallel PC oracle attack also serves an effective TO_Indep attack on the lightly
protected implementation with the shuffling countermeasure.
(a) t-test (b) Class(tr) = 4000
Figure 14: t-test plot and matching a given reduced attack trace tr correponding to class
4000, against reduced templates for classes 3997 and 4000 with shuffling countermeasure
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 441
5.4 Differences from [TUX+
22]
In a recent and independently developed work by Tanaka et al. [TUX+
22], authors also
propose to recover multiple bits in parallel from a PC oracle attack. While the objectives
of [TUX+
22] are aligned with our work, we few subtle differences.
Number of Oracle Queries: We observe that the BDTs for optimal binary PC or-
acle attack are not always optimal for the parallel PC oracle attack. We demonstrate
that BDTs with minimum depth (i.e.) BDTmin_depth are optimal for a high parallelization
factor P, compared to BDTs with minimum entropy (i.e.) BDTmin_ent (Refer Section
3.5.1). However, [TUX+
22] use the same BDTs that were used for the binary PC oracle
attack, to also perform their attack in the parallel setting. Refer Tab.3(a) of [TUX+
22]
for the BDT used to attack Kyber512 in the parallel setting and Tab.9(a) of [XIU+
21] for
the BDT used to attack Kyber512 in the binary setting. Thus, our approach to construct
optimal BDTs for the parallel PC oracle attack yields lower number of queries for Kyber,
even in the presence of a perfect parallel PC oracle.
Side-Channel based Oracle: The authors of [TUX+
22] utilized a multi-class clas-
sification neural network (NN) to realize a parallel PC oracle, while we utilize a simple
t-test based classifier. We observe that the attacker needs to carry out the pre-processing
phase to create templates for every new public key, it is important to minimize the sum of
traces for the pre-processing phase and key recovery phase. This is especially applicable in
the scenario where the attacker does not have access to a clone device. Thus, we chose
t-test based classifier with an objective to reduce the no. of traces during pre-processing
phase, typically T < 10 for each class. On the other hand, NN-based classifiers are typically
known to require a very high number of traces for training. [TUX+
22] utilize 1000 traces
for training and 500 traces for validation for each of the 2P
classes. While NN-based
classifiers are suitable for training on the clone device (offline), they are sub-optimal when
there is no access to a clone device.
Moreover, we perform experiments on a full implementation of Kyber to realize the par-
allel PC oracle, while [TUX+
22] perform experiments on implementations of SHAKE,SHA3
and AES. Thus, we are able to exploit leakage from several operations within the re-
encryption procedure which enable us to yield a 100 % success rate over single traces to
realize a practical parallel PC oracle.
5.5 Applicability to other PQC schemes
While we present our parallel PC oracle attack for Kyber KEM, we also believe that our
attack can be adapted in a straightforward manner to other lattice-based schemes such as
Saber and Frodo. This is because our technique to construct chosen-ciphertexts not only
applies to Kyber, but to the broader framework of the LPR encryption scheme [LPR10],
which forms the core of several lattice-based KEMs such as Kyber, Saber [DKR+
20],
NewHope [AAB+
], Round5 [BBF+
], LAC [LLJ+
] and Frodo [ABD+
20]. We recall that
the binary PC oracle attacks proposed in several prior works [RRCB20,UXT+
22] have
been shown to be adaptable to several LWE/LWR-based schemes including Kyber and
Saber, albeit with appropriate changes in the actual value of the chosen-ciphertexts and
the number of queries for key recovery. We also experimentally validated our attack on
Saber through simulations of a perfect parallel PC oracle. We would like to briefly sketch
the idea to perform parallel PC oracle attack on Saber.
Similar to the chosen-ciphertexts for Kyber, we choose u = ku · x0
and v = kv ·
442 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
(
Pi=(P −1)
i=0 xi
) where t ∈ Z+
. Thus, the decrypted message m is given as:
mi =
(
Decode(kv − ku · s[i]), if i ∈ [0, P − 1]
Decode(−ku · s[i]), for i ∈ [P, n − 1]
(18)
For the recommended parameters of Saber, the secret coefficients are in a slightly larger
range of [−4, 4] compared to Kyber768 with coefficients in [−2, 2]. Please refer to Fig.15
for the BDT with minimum depth we were able to achieve for the recommended parameter
sets of Saber.
For (ku = 57) and different values for kv ∈ [1, 7], we were able to uniquely distinguish
candidates for the secret coefficient in the range [−2, 4] in not more than 4 queries. However,
we were not able to distinguish between candidates −3 and −4 using ku = 57. Thus, we
have to utilize an additional query of (ku, kv) = (54, 1) to distinguish between −3 and
−4. However, in case of Kyber, we were able to distinguish all candidates between [−2, 2]
using the same value of ku, in not more than 3 queries (Refer Fig.3). We estimate that,
for parallelization factor P = 10, we would require approximately 390 queries in the key
recovery phase for full key recovery, compared to 232 for Kyber768 (Refer Tab.2). Thus,
we can see that our technique can be easily adapted to Saber, albeit with differences in
the number of traces for key recovery. Similarly, we believe our attack can also be adapted
to other LWE/LWR-based KEMs such as NewHope, Round5, LAC and Frodo which are
based on the LPR encryption scheme. However, adapting our attack to other lattice-based
schemes based on the NTRU paradigm such as NTRU [CDH+
19], NTRU Prime [BBC+
20]
is not trivial, and thus consider them as potential future work.
KV = 4
kv = 1
kv = 3
kv = 2
kv = 6
kv = 5 kv = 7
1 2 4 3
0
-2 -1
1 0
1
0
1 0
1 1
0 0
0
1
0
1
kv = 1
-4 -3
0
1
ku = 57
ku = 54
Figure 15: Optimal BDT for Parallel PC oracle based CCA on Saber (recommended
parameters)
6 Conclusion
In this work, we propose novel parallel PC oracle based side-channel attacks, which are
capable of recovering an arbitrary P number of bits of information about the secret key
in a single trace. We experimentally validated our attacks on the fastest implementation
of unprotected Kyber KEM in the pqm4 library. Our experiments yielded improvements
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 443
in the range of 2.89× and 7.65× in the number of queries, compared to state-of-the-art
binary PC oracle attacks, while arbitrarily high improvements are possible given the
generic nature of the attack. We also show that our proposed attacks are able to achieve
the lowest number of queries for key recovery, even over implementations protected with
low-cost countermeasures such as shuffling. Masking serves as a concrete countermeasure
against our proposed attacks, and therefore we believe our work stresses the strong need to
implement masking countermeasures for lattice-based schemes, particularly for embedded
applications. The future directions of our presented work are finding theoretical optimal
attacks in the context of parallel PC oracle and applicability in the hardware targets.
Acknowledgment
Jan-Pieter D’Anvers is funded by FWO (Research Foundation – Flanders) as junior
post-doctoral fellow (contract number 133185 / 1238822N LV).
References
[AAB+
] Erdem Alkim, Roberto Avanzi, Joppe W. Bos, Leo Ducas, Antonio de
la Piedra, Thomas Poppelmann, Peter Schwabe, and Douglas Stebila.
NewHope (Version 1.1): Algorithm Specifications And Supporting Docu-
mentation (April 10, 2020). Submission to the NIST post-quantum project.
[AAC+
22] Gorjan Alagic, Daniel Apon, David Cooper, Quynh Dang, Thinh Dang, John
Kelsey, Jacob Lichtinger, Carl Miller, Dustin Moody, Rene Peralta, et al.
Status report on the third round of the NIST post-quantum cryptography
standardization process. Technical report, National Institute of Standards
and Technology, 2022.
[AASA+
20] Gorjan Alagic, Jacob Alperin-Sheriff, Daniel Apon, David Cooper, Quynh
Dang, John Kelsey, Yi-Kai Liu, Carl Miller, Dustin Moody, Rene Peralta, et al.
Status report on the second round of the NIST post-quantum cryptography
standardization process. US Department of Commerce, NIST, 2020.
[ABD+
20] Erdem Alkim, Joppe W. Bos, Leo Ducas, Patrick Longa, Ilya Mironov,
Michael Naehrig, Valeria Nikolaenko, Chris Peikert, Ananth Raghunathan,
and Douglas Stebila. Frodo : Algorithm Specifications And Supporting
Documentation (June 4, 2021). Submission to the NIST post-quantum project,
2020.
[ABD+
21] Roberto Avanzi, Joppe W. Bos, Leo Ducas, Eike Kiltz, Tancrede Lepoint,
Vadim Lyubashevsky, John Schanck, Peter Schwabe, Gregor Seiler, and
Damien Stehlé. CRYSTALS-Kyber (version 3.02): Algorithm specifications
and supporting documentation (Auguest 4, 2021). 2021.
[ACLZ20] Dorian Amiet, Andreas Curiger, Lukas Leuenberger, and Paul Zbinden.
Defeating NewHope with a single trace. In International Conference on
Post-Quantum Cryptography, pages 189–205. Springer, 2020.
[BBC+
20] Daniel J. Bernstein, Billy Bob Brumley, Ming-Shing Chen, Chitchanok
Chuengsatiansup, Tanja Lange, Adrian Marotzke, Bo-Yuan Peng, Nicola
Tuveri, Christine van Vredendaal, and Bo-Yin Yang. NTRU Prime: Round 3
(October 7, 2020). Submission to the NIST post-quantum project, 2020.
444 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
[BBF+
] Hayo Baan, Sauvik Bhattacharya, Scott Fluhrer, Oscar Garcia-Morchon, Thijs
Laarhoven, Rachel Player, Ronald Rietman, Markku-Juhani O. Saarinen,
, Ludo Tolhuizen, José Luis Torre-Arce, and Zhenfei Zhang. Round5 :
Algorithm Specifications And Supporting Documentation (10th April, 2020).
Submission to the NIST post-quantum project.
[BDH+
21] Shivam Bhasin, Jan-Pieter D’Anvers, Daniel Heinz, Thomas Pöppelmann,
and Michiel van Beirendonck. Attacking and defending masked polynomial
comparison for lattice-based cryptography. 2021(3):334–359, 2021.
[BDHD+
19] Ciprian Băetu, F Betül Durak, Loïs Huguenin-Dumittan, Abdullah Talayhan,
and Serge Vaudenay. Misuse attacks on post-quantum cryptosystems. In
Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Crypto-
graphic Techniques, pages 747–776. Springer, 2019.
[BGR+
21] Joppe W Bos, Marc Gourjon, Joost Renes, Tobias Schneider, and Christine
van Vredendaal. Masking kyber: First-and higher-order implementations.
IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, pages
173–214, 2021.
[CDH+
19] Cong Chen, Oussama Danba, Jeffrey Hoffstein, Andreas Hülsing, Joost
Rijneveld, John M Schanck, Peter Schwabe, William Whyte, and Zhenfei
Zhang. NTRU: Algorithm specifications and supporting documentation
(March 20, 2019). Submission to the NIST post-quantum project, 2019.
[DHP+
22] Jan-Pieter D’Anvers, Daniel Heinz, Peter Pessl, Michiel Van Beirendonck,
and Ingrid Verbauwhede. Higher-order masked ciphertext comparison for
lattice-based cryptography. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware
and Embedded Systems, 2022(2):115–139, Feb. 2022.
[DKR+
20] Jan-Pieter D’Anvers, Angshuman Karmakar, Sujoy Sinha Roy, Frederik
Vercauteren, Jose Maria Bermudo Mera, Michiel Van Beirendonck, and
Andrea Basso. Saber. NIST Round 3 Submissions, 2020.
[DSDGR20] Dana Dachman-Soled, Léo Ducas, Huijing Gong, and Mélissa Rossi. Lwe
with side information: attacks and concrete security estimation. In Annual
International Cryptology Conference, pages 329–358. Springer, 2020.
[DTVV19] Jan-Pieter D’Anvers, Marcel Tiepelt, Frederik Vercauteren, and Ingrid Ver-
bauwhede. Timing attacks on error correcting codes in post-quantum schemes.
In Proceedings of ACM Workshop on Theory of Implementation Security
Workshop, pages 2–9, 2019.
[FO99] Eiichiro Fujisaki and Tatsuaki Okamoto. Secure integration of asymmetric and
symmetric encryption schemes. In Annual international cryptology conference,
pages 537–554. Springer, 1999.
[GJN20] Qian Guo, Thomas Johansson, and Alexander Nilsson. A key-recovery timing
attack on post-quantum primitives using the fujisaki-okamoto transforma-
tion and its application on frodokem. In Annual International Cryptology
Conference, pages 359–386. Springer, 2020.
[HDV20] Loïs Huguenin-Dumittan and Serge Vaudenay. Classical misuse attacks on
nist round 2 pqc. In International Conference on Applied Cryptography and
Network Security, pages 208–227. Springer, 2020.
G. Rajendran, P. Ravi, J.P. D’Anvers, S. Bhasin, A. Chattopadhyay 445
[HHP+
21] Mike Hamburg, Julius Hermelink, Robert Primas, Simona Samardjiska,
Thomas Schamberger, Silvan Streit, Emanuele Strieder, and Christine van
Vredendaal. Chosen ciphertext k-trace attacks on masked cca2 secure kyber.
IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, pages
88–113, 2021.
[HKL+
22] Daniel Heinz, Matthias J Kannwischer, Georg Land, Thomas Pöppelmann,
Peter Schwabe, and Daan Sprenkels. First-order masked kyber on arm
cortex-m4. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2022.
[KRSS19] Matthias J. Kannwischer, Joost Rijneveld, Peter Schwabe, and Ko Stoffelen.
PQM4: Post-quantum crypto library for the ARM Cortex-M4, 2019. https:
//github.com/mupq/pqm4.
[KU02] Boonserm Kijsirikul and Nitiwut Ussivakul. Multiclass support vector ma-
chines using adaptive directed acyclic graph. In Proceedings of the 2002
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks. IJCNN’02 (Cat. No.
02CH37290), volume 1, pages 980–985. IEEE, 2002.
[LLJ+
] Xianhui Lu, Yamin Liu, Dingding Jia, Haiyang Xue, Jingnan He, Zhenfei
Zhang, Zhe Liu, Hao Yang, Bao Li, and Kunpeng Wang. LAC: Practical
Ring-LWE Based Public-Key Encryption with Byte-Level Modulus (19th
Dec, 2019).
[LPR10] Vadim Lyubashevsky, Chris Peikert, and Oded Regev. On ideal lattices and
learning with errors over rings. In EUROCRYPT, pages 1–23, 2010.
[NDGJ21] Kalle Ngo, Elena Dubrova, Qian Guo, and Thomas Johansson. A side-
channel attack on a masked ind-cca secure saber kem implementation. IACR
Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, pages 676–
707, 2021.
[NDJ21] Kalle Ngo, Elena Dubrova, and Thomas Johansson. Breaking masked and
shuffled cca secure saber kem by power analysis. In Proceedings of the 5th
Workshop on Attacks and Solutions in Hardware Security, pages 51–61, 2021.
[PP19] Peter Pessl and Robert Primas. More practical single-trace attacks on the
number theoretic transform. In International Conference on Cryptology and
Information Security in Latin America, pages 130–149. Springer, 2019.
[PPM17] Robert Primas, Peter Pessl, and Stefan Mangard. Single-trace side-channel
attacks on masked lattice-based encryption. In International Conference on
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, pages 513–533. Springer,
2017.
[QCZ+
21] Yue Qin, Chi Cheng, Xiaohan Zhang, Yanbin Pan, Lei Hu, and Jintai Ding. A
systematic approach and analysis of key mismatch attacks on lattice-based nist
candidate kems. In International Conference on the Theory and Application
of Cryptology and Information Security, pages 92–121. Springer, 2021.
[RBRC21] Prasanna Ravi, Shivam Bhasin, Sujoy Sinha Roy, and Anupam Chattopadhyay.
On exploiting message leakage in (few) nist pqc candidates for practical
message recovery attacks. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, 2021.
[RRCB20] Prasanna Ravi, Sujoy Sinha Roy, Anupam Chattopadhyay, and Shivam
Bhasin. Generic side-channel attacks on cca-secure lattice-based pke and
kems. IACR Trans. Cryptogr. Hardw. Embed. Syst., 2020(3):307–335, 2020.
446 Pushing the Limits of Generic Side-Channel Attacks on LWE-based KEMs
[SCZ+
22] Muyan Shen, Chi Cheng, Xiaohan Zhang, Qian Guo, and Tao Jiang. Find
the bad apples: An efficient method for perfect key recovery under imperfect
sca oracles–a case study of kyber. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2022.
[SKL+
20] Bo-Yeon Sim, Jihoon Kwon, Joohee Lee, Il-Ju Kim, Tae-Ho Lee, Jaeseung
Han, Hyojin Yoon, Jihoon Cho, and Dong-Guk Han. Single-trace attacks on
message encoding in lattice-based KEMs. 8:183175–183191, 2020.
[TUX+
22] Yutaro Tanaka, Rei Ueno, Keita Xagawa, Akira Ito, Junko Takahashi, and
Naofumi Homma. Multiple-valued plaintext-checking side-channel attacks
on post-quantum kems. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2022/940, 2022.
https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/940.
[UXT+
22] Rei Ueno, Keita Xagawa, Yutaro Tanaka, Akira Ito, Junko Takahashi, and
Naofumi Homma. Curse of re-encryption: A generic power/em analysis on
post-quantum kems. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems, pages 296–322, 2022.
[XIU+
21] Keita Xagawa, Akira Ito, Rei Ueno, Junko Takahashi, and Naofumi Homma.
Fault-injection attacks against nist’s post-quantum cryptography round 3
kem candidates. In International Conference on the Theory and Application
of Cryptology and Information Security, pages 33–61. Springer, 2021.
[XPR+
21] Zhuang Xu, Owen Michael Pemberton, Sujoy Sinha Roy, David Oswald, Wang
Yao, and Zhiming Zheng. Magnifying side-channel leakage of lattice-based
cryptosystems with chosen ciphertexts: The case study of kyber. IEEE
Transactions on Computers, 2021.
