General Rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain.
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at oa@kb.dk providing details, and we will remove access to the work
immediately and investigate your claim.
If the document is published under a Creative Commons license, this applies instead of the general rights.
This cover sheet template is made available by AU Library
Version 3, October 2023
This is the accepted manuscript (AM)/author accepted manuscript (AAM) of the article
The content in the accepted manuscript version has been peer reviewed (when applicable)
and accepted for publication, though any post-acceptance changes such as typography and
layout may lead to differences between this version and the final published version.
How to cite this publication
Please cite the final published version:
Shafaghi, P., Dolatshahi, M., & Farkhani, H. (2023). Energy-efficient spintronic based
neuromorphic computing system using current mode track and termination circuit. IEEE
Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 42(9), 2915-
2923. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCAD.2023.3238879
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be
obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing
this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale
or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other
works
1
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
Energy-efficient spintronic based neuromorphic
computing system using current mode track and
termination circuit
Pegah Shafaghi, Mehdi Dolatshahi and Hooman Farkhani, Member, IEEE
Abstract— Spintronic nano-devices have shown great potential
to reduce the energy consumption of neuromorphic computing
systems (NCSs). In the spintronic-based NCSs, the switching or
oscillation of a magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) is a common
approach to mimic neuron firing. However, still there is a gap
between the performance (operation/sec/Watt/cm2
) of the human
brain and NCSs. To mitigate this gap, it is essential to further
decrease the energy consumption and the delay of the NCS. The
high energy consumption of the MTJ-based NCS is mostly related
to the high current needed to switch the MTJ state. Hence, some
previous methods tried to perform real-time tracking of the MTJ
state by monitoring the voltage across the MTJ and cut-off it's
current immediately after switching. However, due to the small
voltage changes after switching, these methods suffer from high-
power consumption. In this paper, a new method based on the
tracking of the MTJ current (instead of its voltage) and
terminating the MTJ current after switching is proposed. Due to
the large changes in the MTJ current after switching (about 40%),
there is no need to use an amplifier in the proposed common-mode
tracking and terminating circuit (CM-TTC). The simulation
results in 65-nm CMOS technology confirm that the proposed
CM-TTC technique can improve the energy consumption and
speed of a typical NCS by 53% and 2X. Moreover, the power
consumption, delay and area overhead of CM-TTC is reduced by
12.8%, 73% and 95% compared with the best state-of-the-art
track and termination circuits.
Index Terms—Energy-efficiency, Memristor, Magnetic tunnel
junction, Neuromorphic computing system, Spintronics.
I. INTRODUCTION
rtificial intelligence (AI) has witnessed explosive
growth over the past two decades. The core processing
unit of AI is an artificial neural network (ANN) inspired
by the human brain with remarkable accuracy progress in
cognitive applications [1]. Despite all the progress in ANN
algorithms, the biggest challenge of AI is the low performance
(operation/Joul/area) of their hardware implementation using
typical computers (CPUs and GPUs). Brain-inspired hardware
implementation of ANNs algorithms, called neuromorphic
computing systems (NCSs), has shown to be a promising
solution to deal with the low performance of implementing AI
on typical computers (e.g. TrueNorth by IBM [2] and Loihi by
Intel [3]). NCSs overcome the limitation of the word-at-a-time
thinking of typical computers by doing massively parallel data
processing, similar to the brain. Despite the higher density and
energy efficiency of implementing ANN algorithms on NCSs,
they are still far from human brain performance.
There are different state-of-the-art implementations of NCS
using CMOS (digital and analog) and emerging technologies
(e.g. spintronic, phase change memory and memristors).
Implementation of NCSs using conventional digital and analog
CMOS is area-and energy-inefficient [4]. This led to a
significant effort to examine the hybrid implementation of NCS
through implementing the neural networks using emerging
technologies and CMOS circuits as controlling blocks. Thanks
to the advancement of nanotechnology, one of the most
promising hybrid implementations of NCS is the combination
of nanoscale spin-based components and CMOS devices (i.e.
spintronics). Spintronics has made it possible to implement
NCSs with higher density and lower power consumption [5-6].
Hardware implementation of the NCS requires massively
parallel components (act as neurons) interacting with each other
and the external world through the adaptive or programmable
devices acting as synapses. In spintronic-based NCS, neurons
and synapses would be implemented using magnetic elements
while CMOS circuits can be used as input interfacing circuits
and readout circuits for sensing outputs. The design of neurons
determines the performance and the integration density of the
NCS regardless of the network topology [7-10].
One of the most popular spintronic-based implementations
of NCS is to use MTJs and memristors for mimicking the
neuron and synapse functionalities, respectively. However, the
MTJ switching behavior is innately stochastic. Hence, there is
a need for passing the current to MTJ for a time period longer
than the worst-case switching time of MTJ to guarantee its
correct switching when its current is higher than the threshold
current. This means in most cases, the switching current will
flow through the MTJ even after its switching. This leads to
high energy consumption during the MTJ switching process. In
the literature, attempts have been made to solve this problem
using tracking the voltage across the MTJ for detecting its
switching and terminating its current [11-13]. However, due to
the low voltage change after switching, those methods need a
power-hungry amplifier which results in a high-power
A
Pegah Shafaghi, Mehdi Dolatshahi and Hooman Farkhani are with the
Department of electrical engineering, Najafabad branch, Islamic Azad
University, Najafabad, Iran. (e-mail: p_shafaghy@yahoo.com;
me_dolatshahi@yahoo.com; h_farkhani@yahoo.com)
Hooman Farkhani is also with Electronics and Photonics section, Electrical
and Computer Engineering Department, Aarhus University, 8200 Aarhus,
Denmark. (e-mail: farkhani@ece.au.dk)
2
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
consumption. Note that MTJ switching consumes the majority
of the energy consumption in spintronic-based NCS [14].
In this paper, a new technique based on tracking the MTJ
current (instead of its voltage) and terminating its current
immediately after switching is proposed. Considering the high
changes in the MTJ current after switching (about 40%), there
is no need to use any amplifier in the proposed circuit, which
reduces the power consumption of the proposed circuit in
comparison with the state-of-the-art.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
briefly discusses the implementation of MTJ-based neurons. In
section III, the proposed CM-TTC method is discussed. Section
IV presents the simulation results and comparisons. Finally,
section V concludes the paper.
II. STATE OF THE ART
A. Performance of the Neuron
In a biological neural network, neurons which are known as
a set of parallel processors work together simultaneously and
synapses are in charge of transferring signals among different
neurons. When different input signals come from neurons in the
previous layer (pre-neurons), the post-neuron integrates these
signals in the form of membrane potential. If the membrane
potential of the post-neuron reaches a threshold potential, it
produces a wave-shaped signal (called an action potential) as
shown in Fig.1. Then, the synapse transmits the action potential
to the next neuron. However, it is not a simple transition but the
synapse amplifies or weakens the signal along the path based
on past events.
The artificial neural networks are modeled based on the
biological neural networks, in which proper modeling of the
neuron is the starting point. Each neuron has a single output and
a set of inputs, as shown in Fig. 2. The inputs are weighted and
as mentioned above the sum of these weighted inputs is applied
to the activation function. There are different types of activation
functions discussed in the literature [15-16]. However, in the
MTJ implementation of a neuron based on switching, the step
function will be used. The activation function produces the
output based on the summation of the input signals. The inputs,
named as v1, v2, …, vn, are weighted by the coefficients w1, w2,
…, wn and are applied to the input of the neuron. These weights
represent the biological synaptic functionalities in the neurons
[17]. The operation of the step function can be given as:
𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡 = {
1 𝑖𝑓 ∑ 𝑊𝑖𝑉𝑖 + 𝐵𝑖 ≥ 𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑
0 𝑖𝑓 ∑ 𝑊𝑖𝑉𝑖 + 𝐵𝑖 < 𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑
(1)
where Wi is the corresponding synapse weight, Bi is the neuron
bias and Vi indicates the neuron input.
B. Magnetic Tunnel Junction basis
MTJ is one of the most promising spin-based devices. Fig. 3
(a) shows the basic structure of an MTJ. It consists of two
ferromagnetic layers with a non-conductive thin tunneling
barrier that is sandwiched between the two ferromagnetic
layers. The pinned layer (PL), also known as a fixed layer, is a
thick ferromagnetic layer with a fixed magnetic orientation. In
contrast to the PL, the free layer (FL) magnetization direction
can be changed by applying an external magnetic field and/or
passing current in the right direction [18]. As shown in Fig. 3
(a), the magnetization direction of the FL relative to the PL
determines the MTJ resistive behavior. When the magnetization
directions of two layers are in parallel (P-state), the MTJ
resistance (RP) is low, however, if the magnetization directions
of the two magnetic layers are anti-parallel (AP-state), the MTJ
resistance (RAP) is high. Fig. 3 (b) shows the house curve
characteristic of the MTJ while switching from AP to P and vice
versa. As illustrated in Fig. 3 (b), the MTJ switching behavior
is asymmetric, i.e. the MTJ switching time and energy
consumption while switching from P to AP and AP to P are
different. In most of the MTJ implementations, the P to AP state
transition has a higher switching threshold current. It is because
the PL weakens the spin electrons [19-21]. In other words, the
PL magnetic field prevents the FL spins from switching to the
opposite direction of the PL magnetic direction [22]. This
prevention leads to an increased current needed for the MTJ
Fig. 2. The typical model of an artificial neuron.
Fig. 3. (a) The schematic of the MTJ and the switching behavior of the MTJ.
(b) The house curve characteristic of the MTJ.
Fig. 1. The simplified model of human brain computation.
3
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
switching. In contrast, while switching from AP to P, PL
magnetic field will ease the switching process, leading to a
lower threshold current. As a result, the initial state of the MTJ-
based neuron will be set at AP-state to reduce the power
consumption and delay of the NCS [23]. If a sufficient current
flows from FL to PL, the MTJ state switches to P-state and the
MTJ resistance will decrease to Rp [24-26]. Accordingly, by
using a readout circuit, it is possible to evaluate the resistance
of MTJ and determine whether the neuron has fired or not.
C. MTJ and Memristor Functionality in Neuromorphic
Computing System
The human brain is a massively parallel computing system
that employs the neurons as simple computing units and
synapses as adjustable weighted connections between neurons
as described in section II. The NCS, tries to mimic the way that
the brain does computing. To implement the NCS, it is needed
to implement neuronal and synaptic functionalities through
electronic elements. Hence, memristors can be used to perform
synaptic functionality to get low-power operation [27-28]. The
memristor resistance can be tuned by electrical signals. Each
input is connected to the neuron by the memristor. Hence,
different inputs and their corresponding memristors apply
different currents to the post-neuron. These currents will be
added together and the total current passes through the MTJ
which is used to mimic the neuron. If the total current will be
higher than the critical current (Isum>Icritical), MTJ will switch.
Then, the MTJ switching will be detected by the readout circuit
as neuron firing. However, the relatively high threshold current
of switching and the stochastic nature of the MTJ switching
increase the energy consumption of the MTJ-based NCS. To
this end, a novel CM-TTC technique is proposed to mitigate the
negative impact of the MTJ switching stochasticity.
III. PROPOSED TRACKING AND TERMINATING TECHNIQUE
In this section, the structure of the proposed CM-TTC will be
explained. As mentioned above, the MTJ is used to mimic
neuron functionality, however, the high energy consumption
needed for the MTJ switching increases the energy
consumption of the NCS. The CM-TTC tries to decrease the
energy consumption of the MTJ switching using high changes
in the MTJ current after switching and cutting off the MTJ
current, immediately.
A. Main Idea
The schematic of the CM-TTC-based NCS is shown in Fig.
4 (a). The proposed CM-TTC technique can be added to a
typical NCS to decrease its energy consumption. A significant
part of the energy consumption of the MTJ-based NCS is
related to the high current required to switch the MTJ state.
Hence, the CM-TTC is proposed to decrease the total energy
consumption by tracking and terminating the MTJ current
immediately after switching. To sense the MTJ switching, CM-
TTC tracks the MTJ current changes. Due to the high changes
in the MTJ current after switching (about 40%), there is no need
to use an amplifier in the CM-TTC. This will decrease the
energy consumption and delay of the CM-TTC-based NCS,
significantly. In the literature, different methods have been
proposed to lower the energy consumption of MTJ switching.
The real-time sensing (RTS) circuit proposed in [11] and the
Self-Referenced Differential Write Termination (SDWT)
circuit [13] track the MTJ state during the stimulation phase
simultaneously by sensing its voltage and cutting off the MTJ
current immediately after the MTJ switching. Despite the
decrease in the energy consumption of the MTJ using the RTS
and SDWT circuits, they consume a remarkable amount of
energy due to the use of an amplifier. The amplifier is needed
to amplify the voltage changes after switching (about 40mv) to
be comparable with a reference voltage using a comparator. In
the RTS-based NCS, 25-40% of total energy consumption is
related to the RTS circuit [11]. It is because the amplifier in the
RTS circuit is turned on for 90% of the stimulation phase.
Moreover, the delay of the RTS circuit is about 0.55ns and
during this time not only the RTS consumes energy, but also a
high current passes through the MTJ. Fig. 4 (b) shows the
circuit implementation of the CM-TTC. It consists of five main
blocks including a current mirror, a current comparator, a rail-
to-rail output buffer, two OR logic gates and a rise edge
detector. The idea is to compare the MTJ current with a
reference current equal to the average current of the MTJ after
and before switching. To do that the MTJ current is mirrored to
the current comparator via M1 and M2. Then, the current
comparator formed by M2-8 transistors compares the MTJ
current with a reference current ((IMTJ-P+IMTJ-AP)/2). The
reference current, formed by M8, is mirrored to the M6 through
M7 transistor. The size of M8 is designed in a way that the
reference current will be the average of IM5 before and after
switching. On the other hand, the gate of M8 is connected to the
common node between the transmission gate (TG1) and M1.
The main advantage of this biasing method is that it will help
the CM-TTC circuit to detect switching more effectively.
Before switching, the MTJ resistance is high (RAP) and the gate
voltage of M8 is relatively low. As a result, the reference current
is high. After switching, because the gate voltage of M8 will
increase, the reference current will decrease. This will act as
positive feedback and increase the voltage of the COM node
even more which leads to a faster current cut-off in the MTJ
branch. Finally, the current of the M5 transistor (MTJ current)
is compared with the reference current passing through M6
((IMTJ-P+IMTJ-AP)/2). Before switching, MTJ is in AP-state and
its current is less than the reference current. Hence, IM5 is
smaller than IM6 which will push M6 to the linear region. This
will reduce the voltage of the COM node to voltages below
VDD/2. Then, this voltage will be inverted and amplified to VDD
at BU which will keep TG1 (MST) turned on (off) through the
OR gates. The rise edge detector (RED) aims to detect the
positive edges of Pulse1 and create a short pulse immediately
afterward. This short pulse will keep TG1 on through the OR
gates when Pulse1 will be switched from ‘0’ to ‘1’. Without
RED block, both Pulse1 and (Pulse1
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅) will be ‘0’ for a short
time during the rising edge of Pulse1 which will turn off TG1
irreversibly. This means that the TG1 will remain off even after
Pulse1 switching is complete. As soon as the MTJ will be
switched to P-state, its current will increase to IMTJ-P due to the
MTJ resistance reduction. Hence, IM5 will be more than IM6 that
will push M5 to the linear region and increase the voltage of the
COM node to voltages above VDD/2. Again, this voltage will be
4
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
inverted to ‘0’ at BU which will cause TG1 (MST) to turn off
(on). Hence, the MTJ current will be cut off as soon as the MTJ
switches, preventing excessive energy consumption. At the
same time, the next layer will be stimulated by turning on MST.
Hence, there is no need for a read circuit and CM-TTC will
perform a read and next-layer stimulation operations that can
effectively improve area and energy consumption of CM-TTC
based NCS.
B. Voltage and current change in the MTJ due to switching
This section compares voltage changes at two ends of the
MTJ (VCM1 and VCM2) with the MTJ current (IMTJ) changes due
to the MTJ switching. To do that we studied the effect of the
MTJ switching on IMTJ, VCM1 and VCM2 for the different number
of inputs (Fig. 5 (a)) and different input voltages (Fig. 5 (b)). In
both cases, the IMTJ changes (more than 40%) due to switching
are much greater than VCM1 changes (less than 5%) and VCM2
changes (less than 17%). This shows the higher efficiency of
utilizing the MTJ current changes for the MTJ switching
detection compared with voltage changes.
Fig. 5 (a) shows the change in IMTJ, VCM1 and VCM2 due to
switching in percentage for the different number of inputs (1 to
10). By increasing the number of inputs, the changes in VCM1
and VCM2 are almost constant while the changes in IMTJ will
slightly increase by increasing the number of inputs. Hence, it
can be concluded that changes in the number of inputs have a
negligible effect on the changes in IMTJ, VCM1 and VCM2.
Moreover, in all cases, the percentage of IMTJ change (> 40%)
is much higher than the percentage change of VCM1 (<3%) and
VCM2 (<17%). Fig. 5 (b) shows the percentage of changes in
IMTJ, VCM1 and VCM2 due to switching for different input
voltages (Vi from 0.95v to 1.2v). The percentage of IMTJ
changes is much higher than VCM1 and VCM2 changes for
different input voltages. These results also confirm that using
current changes to detect the MTJ switching will be much more
effective than using voltage changes. As a result, after
switching the MTJ from AP-state to P-state, high changes in the
MTJ current (around 40%) will occur.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, the simulation results of the CM-TTC-based
NCS using the predictive 65-nm CMOS model [29] are
presented. The supply voltage and the temperature of the
Fig. 4. (a) The schematic of the CM-TTC-based NCS and (b) its CMOS implementation.
Fig. 5. (a) The percentage of the MTJ current changes and voltage changes for
different number of inputs when the input voltage is 1V. (b) The percentage of
the MTJ current changes and voltage changes for different input voltages when
the number of inputs is 5.
5
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
simulation in the HSPICE simulator are considered as 1V and
25°C, respectively. The compact modular MTJ model [30]
which is working based on a stochastic LLG solver block is
used. For the memristor, the TEAM model [31] is used in
simulations due to its flexibility and accuracy. Table I shows
the typical values of MTJs, memristors and CMOS transistors
used in the proposed CM-TTC-based NCS.
A. Effect of Process Variation on the MTJ Switching Time
The process variations (PVs) of MTJ, transistors and
memristors can change the switching time (ST) of the MTJ.
Hence, in order to investigate the performance of the proposed
CM-TTC in the presence of PVs, Monte Carlo simulations of
1000 iterations are run for different MTJ current values. For
each MTJ current, the mean value and standard deviation of the
ST are calculated. Fig. 6 shows the 6-sigma variations of ST for
different MTJ current values. The shortest ST is achieved as
1.87ns at IMTJ=170µA and the longest ST is calculated as
13.27ns at IMTJ=120µA. Fig. 6 shows the ST histogram and its
fitted positively skewed function for IMTJ=120µA. Both thermal
fluctuations and process variations effects will affect the
standard deviation. However, the thermal fluctuations are the
main source of the ST mean value reduction [32].
B. Transient Simulation
Fig. 7 shows the transient simulation of the proposed CM-
TTC circuit. Transient simulation is done for VDD=1V. The
angle (θ), between the magnetization of the two ferromagnetic
layers of MTJ (PL and FL), determines the MTJ state. If θ=0, it
means that the MTJ is in the P-state, while θ=π means that the
MTJ is in the AP-state. The simulation of NCS starts at t=1ns
by enabling the Pulse1 signal. The MTJ is switched at 6.97ns
after enabling Pulse1. For the ST of 6.97ns, the high skew and
low skew standard deviations are calculated as 1.05ns and
0.85ns, respectively, using a Monte Carlo (MC) simulation with
1000 iterations (the details of the MC simulation can be found
in the next subsection). Considering the high skew standard
deviation of 1.05ns, the 6sigma+mean value of ST is calculated
as 13.27ns. Moreover, the low skew standard deviation
determines the 6sigma-mean value of ST as 1.87ns. Hence, the
fastest ST and the slowest ST in the presence of 6sigma
variations are 13.27ns and 1.87ns, respectively. As a result, to
guarantee the MTJ switching in the typical NCS in the presence
of 6sigma variations, a pulse period longer than 13.27ns is
required. Because the MTJ switching never happen before 1ns
(the fastest ST is calculated as 1.87ns), the CM-TTC circuit will
be turned on with 1ns delay with respect to Pulse1 to reduce the
Fig. 7. Transient simulation of the NCS with proposed tracking and terminating
technique
Fig. 6. The standard deviation and mean value of the MTJ switching time for
various MTJ current values. MC is performed for each current with 1000
iterations. The 6-sigma variations for different currents of MTJ. The maximum
and minimum ST of MTJ are calculated as 13.27ns at IMTJ=120µA and. 1.87ns
at IMTJ=170µA. The histogram for the switching time of MTJ and the Gaussian
function fitted to the histogram by running MC simulation with 1000 iterations
for the NCS is depicted.
TABLE I
NCS PARAMETERS
MTJ [30]
Free Layer Dimensions 40nm×116nm×1.5nm
Oxide Thickness (TMgO) 1.15 nm
Saturation Magnetization (MS) 850 emu/cm3
Damping Factor (α) 0.028
CMOS
Transistor [29]
Technology 65 nm
VDD 1V
Memristor [31]
RON/ROFF 10/10000
Thin-film thickness 3 nm
K_ON -8×10-13
K_OFF 8×10-13
α 3
6
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
total power consumption of the CM-TTC-based NCS. When the
CM-TTC circuit is on (t>1ns), the MTJ current will be copied
to the branch of the current comparator and will be compared
with the reference current ((IMTJ-P+IMTJ-AP)/2). Before the MTJ
switching, MTJ is in AP-state and its current is lower than the
reference voltage. Hence, the output voltage of the current
comparator (COM) is less than VDD/2 that will be inverted and
amplified to 1V at the BU. This will keep TG1 turned on
through OR gates. When the MTJ switching will happen
(t=6.97ns), the MTJ current will jump above the reference
current. As a result, the output voltage of the current comparator
(VCOM) will go above VDD/2. This will force the voltage of the
BU to be switched from ‘1’ to ‘0’. This will cause the gate
voltage of the control transistor (TG1) will be switched to ‘0’
through the OR gates that will turn TG1 off and cut off the MTJ
current immediately after switching instead of wasting energy
and time until 13.5ns. The delay of the CM-TTC circuit is
estimated to be 0.15ns as shown in Fig. 7.
C. Energy Consumption Reduction in CM-TTC
To calculate the total energy consumption of the CM-TTC-
based NCS, the energy consumption of the MTJ branch
(memristors, MTJ, M1 and transmission gate) and the CM-TTC
have been calculated. The energy consumption of the CM-TTC-
based NCS is calculated as 1088fJ at VDD=1V and IMTJ=120μA.
In the typical NCS, as long as the Pulse1 signal is active, the
current flows in the memristor, MTJ and transistors. Hence, the
energy consumed by the typical NCS is ~2316fJ.
When Pulse1 rises to ‘1’, the MTJ is stimulated and the CM-
TTC senses the MTJ state, simultaneously. In case, the MTJ
switching occurs, the CM-TTC cuts off the current path by
turning off the TG1 and stimulates the post-neuron. This
reduces the energy consumption of NCS from 2316fJ to 1088fJ.
The energy consumption of the CM-TTC based NCS at the
optimal delay (calculated as 0.15ns in section D) is achieved as
1088fJ. Hence, the energy consumption of CM-TTC-based
NCS is reduced by 53% compared to the typical NCS.
The total energy consumption of the CM-TTC-based NCS
and the typical NCS are shown in Fig. 8 for different MTJ
currents. In the typical NCS, after MTJ switching, the MTJ
current will flow until the end of stimulation (13.5ns). By
increasing the MTJ current, both the average and worst-case ST
will reduce at the cost of a larger current drawn from the source.
In the CM-TTC based NCS, a shorter average ST means energy
reduction in both the MTJ branch and the CM-TTC circuit. As
a result, the total energy consumption of both the typical NCS
and the CM-TTC based NCS is reduced by increasing the MTJ
current. However, increasing the MTJ current will reduce the
energy consumption more effectively in the CM-TTC based
NCS compared with the typical NCS. This is due to the fact that
increasing IMTJ will reduce the mean value of ST faster than the
worst-case ST. As shown in Fig. 8, the energy consumption of
CM-TTC based NCS decreases from 1088fJ at IMTJ=120μA to
534fJ at IMTJ=170μA. Hence, the improvement in CM-TTC
based NCS energy consumption increases from 53% at IMTJ=
120μA to 66% at IMTJ=170μA compared with the typical NCS.
D. Optimization Delay on CM-TTC
The delay of the CM-TTC can change the total energy
consumption of the CM-TTC-based NCS. The faster the MTJ
current cuts off after switching (less delay), the lower the
energy consumption of NCS is. On the other hand, to increase
the speed of the CM-TTC, a higher current should be driven in
this circuit. This leads to the higher energy consumption of the
CM-TTC. Hence, an optimal delay that minimizes the total
energy consumption of the CM-TTC based NCS should be
calculated. The NCS and CM-TTC energy consumption are
shown in Fig. 9 (a). To find the optimal delay value, the total
energy consumption of the CM-TTC based NCS is calculated
versus different delays of CM-TTC for different MTJ currents
(i.e. 120μA - 170μA) as shown in Fig. 9 (b). The CM-TTC
delay is determined as the difference between the time in which
the MTJ is switched and the time in which the MTJ current will
Fig. 8. The total energy consumption comparison of the CM-TTC-based NCS
and the typical NCS for different MTJ currents. The improvement of the total
energy consumption of the CM-TTC-based NCS in comparison with the typical
NCS is shown as a percentage.
Fig. 9. The total energy consumption of the CM-TTC-based NCS, the energy
consumption of the CM-TTC and energy consumption of the NCS versus
delay of the CM-TTC for different MTJ currents. When the delay of the CM-
TTC is 0.15ns, the total energy consumption is minimized at 534fJ for
IMTJ=170μA up to 1088fJ for IMTJ=120μA.
(a)
(b)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45
IMTJ=120µA
IMTJ=170µA
Energy Consumption
Energy
Consumption
(fJ)
Delay (ns)
Optimized Delay
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45
Energy
Consumption
(fJ)
Delay (ns)
NCS
CM-TTC
IMTJ=120µA
IMTJ=170µA
IMTJ=120µA
7
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
be cut off (TG1 turns off). The optimal delay is the delay at
which the total energy consumption of NCS is minimized.
Consequently, the optimal CM-TTC delay is achieved as
0.15ns. Hence, the minimum total energy at the optimal CM-
TTC delay (0.15ns) changes from 1088fJ for IMTJ=120µA up to
534fJ for IMTJ=170µA as shown in Fig. 9 (b).
E. Effect of CM-TTC on the Speed Performance
As mentioned before, according to the 6-sigma worst-case
analysis of ST, the minimum Pulse1 duration is to be chosen as
13.5ns and the overall delay of the read-circuit is considered as
approximately 1ns [25] to guarantee the proper MTJ switching
activity. Hence, the total delay of the NCS is 14.5ns (i.e.
68.9MHz). In the CM-TTC-based NCS, the overall delay
decreases due to the simultaneous tracking of the MTJ state.
Hence, considering the delay of CM-TTC (0.15ns) and the ST
mean value of 6.97ns, the overall delay for the CM-TTC-based
NCS is obtained to be 7.12ns. As a result, the maximum
frequency of 140MHz at VDD=1v (i.e. 2X faster speed) can be
achieved for the proposed system. Noted if a higher current will
be applied to the MTJ, it will be switched faster. This will
increase the general speed of the network at the cost of higher
energy consumption. As shown in Fig.10 (a), the frequency of
the CM-TTC-based NCS increases from 140MHz at IMTJ=
120µA to 398.98MHz at IMTJ=170μA while the frequency of the
typical NCS increases from 68.9MHz at IMTJ=120µA to
154MHz at IMTJ=170ΜHz (Fig. 10 (a)). It shows by increasing
the current the speed improvement due to using CM-TTC will
increase from 2x at IMTJ=120µA to 2.6x at IMTJ=170µA. To
investigate the effect of MTJ scaling on overall speed, the MTJ
size is changed from 70% to 110% of the size used in Table I
(40nm×116nm×1.5nm) and ST and CM-TTC delay are
extracted for VDD=1V (Fig. 10 (b)). Decreasing the MTJ size,
its switching time decreases and the delay of CM-TTC will
slightly increase because smaller MTJs have higher resistance
that will lead to smaller IMTJ that will reduce the speed of CM-
TTC slightly from 0.15ns (40nm×116nm×1.5nm) to 0.25ns (0.7
of 40nm×116nm×1.5nm). On the other hand, by scaling MTJ
its critical current will reduce linearly [33], leading to a linear
reduction in the size of series transistors (i.e. M1 and TG1).
E. Comparison with other designs
Here, different features of the CM-TTC based NCS and its
effectiveness have been compared with other reported designs
in the literature. The results of the proposed CM-TTC is
compared with the best previously proposed methods (RTS [11]
and SDWT [13]) and summarized in Table II. Because the RTS
circuit [11] utilizes the voltage variations (~40mV) of PL, FL
or both to detect the MTJ switching, it requires an amplifier to
amplify the voltage changes. On the other hand, the amplifier
in the RTS circuit is turned on during approximately 90% of the
stimulating phase. This will reduce the energy efficiency of the
RTS circuit. Moreover, utilizing the voltage variations for
sensing the switching increases the delay of the RTS circuit.
This will also affect the energy efficiency of the RTS-based
NCS since during the delay not only the RTS consumes energy
but also a high current is passing through the MTJ (MTJ is in
P-state with low resistance). However, in the CM-TTC-based
NCS, due to the high changes in the MTJ current after
switching, there is no need to use an extra amplifier. This will
decrease the energy consumption of CM-TTC as well as its
delay in comparison with the RTS circuit. The power
consumption of CM-TTC is measured 37.8 μW that is 12.8%
and 14.1% less than RTS and SDWT, respectively. Moreover,
higher changes of IMTJ (~40%) due to switching compared with
VMTJ changes (~15%) as shown in Fig. 5 will reduce the delay
of CM-TTC compared with RTS and SDWT by 73% and 81%,
respectively. Finally, the size of the proposed CM-TTC is
estimated to be 2.7 µm2
that is 95% and 96.4% smaller than
RTS and SDWT, respectively. This large size reduction is due
to the lack of capacitors in the CM-TTC structure.
Another advantage of the CM-TTC compared with state-of-
the-art voltage-based methods is its higher robustness in the
presence of process variations. To this end, an MC simulation
with 1000 iterations is run on the CM-TTC based NCS. Then,
the current comparator output voltage (VCOM) variations and the
buffer decision point (DP) variations are calculated (Fig. 11).
To consider the effect of process variations on transistors,
parameters reported in [34] are used. As shown in Fig. 11 (a),
in the CM-TTC-based NCS, the DP has a normal distribution
with 7.13mV standard deviation while the VCOM distribution is
Fig. 11. The histogram and fitted Gaussian function of VCOM, VO1 and DP due
to process variations for the MC simulation with 1000 iterations while using
(a) CM-TTC-based NCS and (b) RTS-based NCS [11].
Fig. 10. (a) The overall delay/frequency of the CM-TTC-based and typical NCS
versus different MTJ currents. (b) The CM-TTC delay and ST versus MTJ size
normalized to the used size in Table I (40nm×116nm×1.5 nm).
8
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
negatively skewed with a right tail standard deviation (σ2) of
2.23mV and left tail standard deviation (σ1) of 6.82mV. It
means that a 22.5σ variation on both DP of buffer and VCOM is
needed to face a fault which means the chance of error is almost
zero (Fig. 11 (a)). Fig. 11 (b) shows the histogram and fitted
Gaussian function of VO1 and DP for the RTS circuit [11]. The
probability of erroneous output of NCS (18.9σ variation on VO1
and DP voltages) is higher than CM-TTC.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a new current-mode track and termination
circuit (CM-TTC) for real-time sensing of MTJ state in the NCS
application has been presented. The conventional voltage-mode
sensing circuit is replaced with the proposed CM-TTC, to
improve the energy efficiency and speed of NCS. In all state-
of-the-art designs, the voltage changes on nodes across the MTJ
have been used to detect the MTJ switching. However, the CM-
TTC detects the MTJ switching by properly sensing the MTJ
current and terminates its current immediately. Simulation
results show around 2.7X bigger changes in the MTJ current
compared with the MTJ voltage due to switching that will ease
the design of the current-mode track and termination circuit.
The simulation results in 65-nm CMOS technology confirm
that the energy consumption of the proposed CM-TTC-based
NCS and its overall speed are approximately improved by 53%
and 2X in comparison with the typical NCS.
REFERENCES
[1] C. P. langlotz et al., “A roadmap for foundational research on artificial
intelligence in medical imaging: from the 2018 nih/rsna/acr/the academy
workshop,” radiology, vol. 291, no.3, pp. 781-791, Apr. 2019.
[2] IBM’s brain-inspired processor, Online available:
http://www.research.ibm.com/articles/brain-chip.shtml.
[3] M. Davies et al., “Loihi: A Neuromorphic Manycore Processor with On-
Chip Learning,” IEEE Micro, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 82-99, Jan. 2018.
[4] B. Rajendran et al., “Specifications of nanoscale devices & circuits for
neuromorphic computational systems,” IEEE Trans. on Electron Devices,
vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 246-253, Jan. 2013.
[5] A. Sengupta, Y. Shim, and K. Roy, “Proposal for an all-spin artificial neural
network: Emulating neural and synaptic functionalities through domain
wall motion in ferromagnets,” IEEE Trans. on Biomedical Circuits and
Systems, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 1152-1160, May 2016.
[6] X. Fong et al., “Spin-transfer torque devices for logic and memory:
prospects and perspectives,” IEEE Trans. on Computer-Aided Design of
Integrated Circuits and Systems (TCAD), vol. 35, no. 1, pp 1-22, Jan. 2016.
[7] A. Basu et al., “Neural dynamics in reconfigurable silicon,” IEEE Trans. on
Biomedical Circuits and Systems, vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 311-319, Oct. 2010.
[8] S. Ramakrishnan, P. E. Hasler, and C. Gordon, “Floating gate synapses with
spike-time-dependent plasticity,” IEEE Trans. on Biomedical Circuits and
Systems, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 244-252, Jun. 2011.
[9] M. Sharad, D. Fan, and K. Roy, “Spin-neurons: A possible path to energy-
efficient neuromorphic computers,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 114,
no. 23, Dec. 2013.
[10] D. Fan et al, “STT-SNN: A spin-transfer-torque based soft-limiting non-
linear neuron for low-power artificial neural networks,” IEEE Trans. on
Nanotechnology, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1013 – 1023, Jun. 2015.
[11] H. Farkhani et al., “A Low-Power High-Speed Spintronics-Based
Neuromorphic Computing System Using Real Time Tracking Method”,
IEEE Circuits and Systems Society, Vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 627 – 638, Sept. 2018.
[12] T. Zheng et al., “Variable-energy write STT-RAM architecture with bit-
wise write-completion monitoring,” International Symposium on Low
Power Electronics and Design (ISLPED), Beijing, China, Sep. 2013.
[13] H. Farkhani et al., “STT-RAM energy reduction using self-referenced
differential write termination technique,” IEEE Trans. on Very Large Scale
Integration (VLSI), vol. 25, no. 2, 476 – 487, Feb. 2017.
[14] H. Farkhani, IL. Prejbeanu, F. Moradi, “LAS-NCS: A Laser-Assisted
Spintronic Neuromorphic Computing System,” IEEE Trans. on Circuits
and Systems II: Express Briefs, Vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 838 – 842, May. 2019.
[15] K. Leboeuf, R. Muscedere, and M. Ahmadi, "Performance analysis of
table-based approximations of the hyperbolic tangent activation function,"
IEEE 54th International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems
Conf. (MWSCAS), Seoul, Korea (South), Aug. 2011.
[16] Y. Guo et al., “Algorithm Research on Improving Activation Function of
Convolutional Neural Networks”, Chinese Control and Decision Conf.
(CCDC), Nanchang, China, June 2019.
[17] A. Ghomi, M. Dolatshahi, “Design of a New CMOS Low-Power Analogue
Neuron,” IETE Journal of Research, Vol.64, no. 6, pp. 67-75, Aug. 2017.
[18] R. Zand et al., “Scalable adaptive spintronic reconfigurable logic using
area-matched MTJ design,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol.
63, no. 7, pp. 678 – 682, Jul. 2016.
[19] J. Kim et al., “A Technology-Agnostic MTJ SPICE Model with User-
Defined Dimensions for STT-MRAM Scalability Studies,”IEEE Custom
Integrated Circuits Conf., San Jose, CA, USA, Sept. 2015.
[20] K. Nishioka et al., “Novel Quad-Interface MTJ Technology and Its First
Demonstration With High Thermal Stability Factor and Switching
Efficiency for STT-MRAM Beyond 2X nm,” IEEE Trans. on Electron
Devices, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 995-1000, Mar. 2020.
[21] H. Sato et al., “Perpendicular-anisotropy CoFeB-MgO magnetic tunnel
junctions with a MgO/CoFeB/Ta/CoFeB/MgO recording structure,”
Appl.Phys. Lett., vol. 101, no. 2, Jul. 2012.
[22] W. Zhu, H. Li, Y. Chen, and X. Wang, “Current Switching in MgO-Based
Magnetic Tunneling Junctions,” IEEE Tran. on Magnetics, vol. 47, no. 1,
pp. 156-160, Jan. 2011.
[23] E. Hirayama et al., “Magnetization reversal by field and current pulses in
elliptic CoFeB/MgO tunnel junctions with perpendicular easy axis,” IEEE
Magn. Lett., vol. 7, May 2016.
[24] X. Fong et al., “Spin-transfer torque devices for logic and memory:
prospects and perspectives,” IEEE Trans. on Computer-Aided Design of
Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 1-22, Jan. 2016.
[25] A. Sengupta and K. Roy, “A vision for all-spin neural networks: a device
to system perspective,” IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems–I: Regular
Papers, vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 2267 – 2277, Dec. 2016.
[26] A. Sengupta and K. Roy, “Spin-transfer torque magnetic neuron for low
power neuromorphic computing,” IEEE International Joint Conf. on Neural
Networks (IJCNN), Killarney, Ireland, Jul. 2015.
[27] H. Thapliyal, F. Sharifi, and S. Dinesh Kumar, “Energy-Efficient Design
of Hybrid MTJ/CMOS and MTJ/Nanoelectronics Circuits”, IEEE Trans.
On Magnetics, vol. 54, no. 7, Jul. 2018.
[28] M.J. Sharifi and Y. M.Banadaki, “General SPICE models for memristor
and Application to circuit simulation of memristor-based synapses and
memory cells”, Journal of Circuits, Systems, and Computers, vol. 19, no.
2, pp. 407-424, Apr. 2010.
[29] PTM Model, http://ptm.asu.edu/modelcard/2006/65nm_bulk.pm
[30] K. Y. Camsari, S. Ganguly, and S. Datta, "Modular Spintronics Library,"
https://nanohub.org/resources/17831, May. 2013.
[31] S. Kvatinsky et al., “TEAM: threshold adaptive memristor model,” IEEE
Trans. on Circuits and Systems–I: Regular Papers, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 211-
221, Jan. 2013.
[32] X. Wang et al., “Thermal fluctuation effects on spin torque induced
switching: Mean and variations,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 103, no.
3, Feb. 2008.
[33] J.D. Costa et al., “High power and low critical current density spin transfer
torque nano-oscillators using MgO barriers with intermediate thickness,”
Nature Scientific Reports, vol. 7, 2017.
[34] W. Zhao et al., “Rigorous Extraction of Process Variations for 65-nm
CMOS Design,” IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, vol.
22, no. 1, pp. 196-203, Feb. 2009.
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF PROPOSED CM-TTC, RTS AND SDWT CIRCUITS
Parameters
Proposed
CM-TTC
RTS [11] SDWT [13]
Technology
65-nm
CMOS
65-nm
CMOS
65-nm
CMOS
VDD (v) 1 1 1
Delay (ns) 0.15 0.55 0.79
Switching Time (ns) 6.97 7.13 5.28
Power (μW) 37.8 43.34 44.04
Area (µm2
) 2.7 55.08 74.358
9
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
Pegah Shafaghi received my B.Sc. degree
in communication engineering and M.Sc.
degree in electrical engineering from the
Najaf Abad branch, Islamic Azad
University, Isfahan, Iran. She has been
with the Department of Electrical
Engineering of Najafabad Branch, Islamic
Azad University, since 2006. Her research
interests include spintronics, low power
and low voltage neuromorphic computing systems as well as
hybrid MTJ/CMOS logic circuit design.
Mehdi Dolatshahi received the B.Sc.
and M.Sc. degree in Electrical
Engineering in 2003, 2006
respectively. He received the Ph.D.
degree in Electrical Engineering in
2012 from Science and Research
Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Tehran, Iran. He has been with the
Department of Electrical Engineering of Najafabad Branch,
Islamic Azad University, since 2006. His research interests
include VLSI, Neuromorphic ICs and CMOS low-voltage, low-
power analog and mixed-signal integrated circuits design and
optimization; as well as CMOS optical communications circuit
design.
Hooman Farkhani received the B.Sc.
degree in electrical engineering from
the University of Kashan, Kashan, Iran,
in 2004, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees in electronic engineering from
the Ferdowsi University of Mashhad,
Mashhad, Iran, in 2008 and 2014,
respectively. He was a Research
Assistant with the Integrated Circuit Design Laboratory,
Ferdowsi University of Mashhad. He was an Assistant
Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Najafabad Branch, Islamic Azad University, Isfahan, Iran, from
2015 to 2017. He was an MSCA-IF postdoc at Aarhus
University, Denmark from 2017 to 2019, where he is currently
a Tenure-track Assistant professor collaborating with the ICE-
Lab on designing low-power neuromorphic computing systems
using emerging technologies such as spintronics and
memristive devices. His other fields of interest are low power
and low voltage STT-RAM and SRAM design, and low-power
analog and mixed-signal integrated circuits design.
