1
Spatz: Clustering Compact RISC-V-Based Vector
Units to Maximize Computing Efficiency
Matteo Perotti, Samuel Riedel, Matheus Cavalcante, Luca Benini
Abstract—The ever-increasing computational and storage re-
quirements of modern applications and the slowdown of technology
scaling pose major challenges to designing and implementing
efficient computer architectures. To mitigate the bottlenecks of
typical processor-based architectures on both the instruction
and data sides of the memory, we present Spatz, a compact
64-bit floating-point-capable vector processor based on RISC-V’s
Vector Extension Zve64d. Using Spatz as the main Processing
Element (PE), we design an open-source dual-core vector processor
architecture based on a modular and scalable cluster sharing
a Scratchpad Memory (SCM). Unlike typical vector processors,
whose Vector Register Files (VRFs) are hundreds of KiB large,
we prove that Spatz can achieve peak energy efficiency with
a latch-based VRF of only 2 KiB. An implementation of the
Spatz-based cluster in GlobalFoundries’ 12LPP process with
eight double-precision Floating Point Units (FPUs) achieves an
FPU utilization just 3.4% lower than the ideal upper bound on a
double-precision, floating-point matrix multiplication. The cluster
reaches 7.7 FMA/cycle, corresponding to 15.7 GFLOPSDP and
95.7 GFLOPSDP/W at 1 GHz and nominal operating conditions
(TT, 0.80 V, 25 °C), with more than 55% of the power spent on the
FPUs. Furthermore, the optimally-balanced Spatz-based cluster
reaches a 95.0% FPU utilization (7.6 FMA/cycle), 15.2 GFLOPSDP,
and 99.3 GFLOPSDP/W (61% of the power spent in the FPU) on
a 2D workload with a 7 × 7 kernel, resulting in an outstanding
area/energy efficiency of 171 GFLOPSDP/W/mm2
. At equi-area,
the computing cluster built upon compact vector processors
reaches a 30% higher energy efficiency than a cluster with the
same FPU count built upon scalar cores specialized for stream-
based floating-point computation.
Index Terms—RISC-V, Vector Processors, Computer Architec-
ture, Embedded Systems-on-Chip, Machine Learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE pervasiveness of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) applications triggered an ex-
plosion of computational requirements across many application
domains. The required computing of the largest ML model
doubles every 3.4 months, while its parameter count doubles
every 2.3 months [1], [2]. As a result, large-scale computing
systems struggle to keep up with the increasing complexity
of such ML models. In fact, the performance of the fastest
©2025 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
Matteo Perotti, Samuel Riedel, and Matheus Cavalcante are with the
Integrated Systems Laboratory (IIS), ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland.
E-mail: {mperotti, sriedel, matheus}@iis.ee.ethz.ch.
Luca Benini is with the Integrated Systems Laboratory (IIS), ETH Zurich,
8092 Zurich, Switzerland, and also with the Department of Electrical,
Electronic, and Information Engineering (DEI), University of Bologna, 40126
Bologna, Italy. E-mail: lbenini@iis.ee.ethz.ch.
supercomputers only doubles every 1.2 years [2], while their
power budget is capped around 20 MW by infrastructure and
operating cost constraints. Furthermore, smart devices running
AI applications at the Internet of Things (IoT) edge [3]
are also tightly constrained in their power budget due to
battery lifetime [4] and passive cooling requirements [5].
Therefore, small and large modern computing architectures
must aggressively optimize their compute and data movement
energy and delay [6].
To do so, designers often rely on the extreme domain special-
ization of hardware architectures to boost their energy efficiency
and performance at the expense of flexibility. However, the pace
at which AI models evolve today makes extreme specialization
unsustainable, favoring processor-based architectures that easily
adapt to novel algorithms, often augmented with hardware that
can leverage the Data Level Parallelism (DLP) common to AI
workloads.
One of the historical limits of processor-based architectures
is the one-word-at-a-time style of programming inherited from
the von Neumann computer [7], which contributes to the
exceedingly high traffic between memory and processor. This
is a major issue for present computer architectures since
interconnects cannot keep up with transistor scaling [8] and
Static Random-Access Memories (SRAMs) are experiencing a
similar drastic scaling slowdown, leading to large and inefficient
interconnects and considerable area and energy efficiency
overhead when higher memory bandwidth is required.
Moreover, processor-based architectures have very limited
capacity in their General-Purpose Register File (GPR), i.e., their
L0 storage. This limits data reuse in key applications, such
as matrix multiplication, whose arithmetic intensity increases
when more data elements are stored in the GPR. For example,
on RISC-V’s RV64I Instruction Set Architecture (ISA), the
GPR comprises 32 64-bit registers, 256 B [9].
Vector processor architectures are commonly presented as
solutions to the first problem thanks to their Single Instruction,
Multiple Data (SIMD) execution, in which a single instruction
applies the same operation on multiple elements of a vector,
decreasing the number of instructions to fetch, decode, and
issue and relieving the burden on the instruction memory side.
Also, the Vector Register File (VRF) size of vector processors is
a design parameter and is decoupled from the datapath width,
allowing for an additional independent design knob. Many
researchers documented the positive impact of longer vectors
(allowed by larger VRFs) on the instruction count and energy
on the instruction memory side. However, even if longer vectors
proved to increase the architecture’s memory latency tolerance
[10], there is a lack of quantitative analyses on how the VRF
size impacts the bandwidth on the data memory thanks to the
arXiv:2309.10137v2
[cs.AR]
9
Jan
2025
2
additional data reuse.
In addition, even though common vector processor architec-
tures try to maximize the energy efficiency of their compute,
they commonly rely on scalar cores with complex logic that
leverages the applications’ Instruction Level Parallelism (ILP),
practically limiting the overall architecture’s efficiency.
This paper presents Spatz, an open-source Floating Point
Unit (FPU)-ready compact Vector Processing Unit (VPU) based
on the RISC-V Vector Extension (RVV) specification [11],
and use it as the processing element in a multi-Processing
Element (PE) cluster. We couple it with a tiny and lean scalar
core [12], pursuing higher performance and energy efficiency
by leveraging DLP and avoiding complex energy-hungry ILP-
exploitation logic. Spatz reaches high energy efficiency through
an optimized latch-based Standard Cell Memory (SCM) VRF
even without resorting to extremely long vectors. With this
work, we show how Spatz does not only fight the Von Neumann
Bottleneck (VNB) on the instruction side of the memory, but
its VRF also allows it to decrease the bandwidth requirement
on the L1 data Scratchpad Memory (SPM). The contributions
of this paper are:
• The architecture of Spatz, a parametric, compact 64-bit
VPU based on the RVV version 1.0. Spatz uses a generic
accelerator interface, allowing it to work in tandem with
any scalar core compatible with this interface (Section IV).
To our knowledge, the Spatz cluster is the first open-source
multi-core RVV-based vector processor architecture;
• The design of a physically-driven latch-based SCM acting
as a VRF, and an analysis of its post-implementation
energy consumption as a function of its capacity in Glob-
alFoundries’ 12 nm Fin Field-Effect Transistor (FinFET)
node (Section II);
• An analysis of the energy efficiency of the Spatz-based L1
cluster as a function of its L0 VRF capacity. Our analysis
also covers typical clusters built with simple scalar PEs,
and memory streaming solutions (Section III);
This work significantly extends the initial Spatz publica-
tion [13], where Spatz was a 32-bit VPU with no support
for floating-point computation. The addition of 64-bit floating-
point support fundamentally changes Spatz’ target applications
and is an argument for lean PEs driving large functional units.
Furthermore, the discussion concerning the latch-based SCM
architecture and the design of a shared-L1 cluster based on
Spatz are exclusive to this publication. An implementation
of the Spatz-based cluster in GlobalFoundries’ 12 nm FinFET
process with eight double-precision FPUs achieves an FPU
utilization just 3.4% lower than the ideal upper bound on
a double-precision, floating-point 64 × 64 matrix multiplica-
tion. The cluster reaches 7.7 FMA/cycle, corresponding to
15.7 GFLOPSDP and 95.7 GFLOPSDP/W at 1 GHz and nominal
operating conditions (TT, 0.80 V, 25 °C), with more than 55%
of the power spent on the FPUs. At the same area, a computing
cluster built upon compact vector processors reaches an energy
efficiency 30% higher than that of a cluster with the same FPU
count built upon scalar RISC-V-based cores specialized for
stream-based floating-point computation. Spatz is open-sourced
under a liberal license1
.
II. VECTOR REGISTER FILE
The VRF is at the core of any vector processor. It must
provide enough bandwidth for the functional units to achieve
high utilization. In the RISC-V ISA, the vector instruction
with the highest bandwidth requirements is the floating-
point multiply-accumulate between two vectors, vfmacc.vv
(and its integer equivalent, vmacc.vv) [11]. The VRF must
handle reading three operands and writing one result per
cycle to sustain one Fused Multiply-Add (FMA) per cycle.
Furthermore, more VRF bandwidth is required to execute
memory operations concurrently with high-bandwidth multiply-
accumulate operations.
Large vector processors are typically coupled with equally
complex scalar processors. For example, CVA6, an application-
class RV64GC scalar core, consumes 317 pJ per operation of
a simple dot product kernel, with only 28 pJ spent on the
actual computation [14]. Therefore, long vectors are needed to
amortize the large energy overhead associated with fetching
and dispatching individual instructions with a large application-
class (super-)scalar core. Typical large vector units achieve long
vectors and high bandwidth through a large multi-banked VRF,
with five [15] to eight [16] single read/write port (1RW) SRAM
banks per FPU. However, this approach requires inflexible
fine-grained scheduling of the VRF bank accesses [15] or an
architecture that can handle banking conflicts when multiple
operands reside at the same bank [16]. Therefore, VRFs are
coupled with operand “queues” which store the operands until
they are all simultaneously available.
Instead of achieving high functional unit utilization through
hardware complexity, the RISC-V-based Snitch core tries to
tackle the VNB by maximizing the cores’ compute/control
ratio, mitigating the efficiency loss due to deep pipelines and
dynamic scheduling [12]. The Snitch-based shared-L1 cluster
couples Snitch cores, typically RV32I or RV32E, with large
double-precision FPUs. It achieves an energy efficiency of
79 GFLOPSDP/W on a double-precision matrix multiplication
kernel [12], almost double that of state-of-the-art vector
machines [15]. This cluster’s high performance is linked to
Stream Semantic Registers (SSRs) [12], which stream L1 data
into and from the FPUs without explicit load/store instructions.
As a result, SSRs incur high L1 traffic. For example, each core
must read two L1 SPM words per cycle to sustain the execution
of a matrix multiplication kernel without incurring systematic
structural hazards. This traffic is particularly taxing on the
cluster’s physical implementation, as the L1 SPM interconnect
is the critical factor for its scalability [17]. Furthermore, the
breakdown of SRAM and interconnect scaling makes achieving
the L1 bandwidth required by SSRs challenging.
The vector-SIMD ISA provides a clean abstraction for
software to adapt automatically to the microarchitecture’s vector
length [18]. Also, as further discussed in the next sections,
the VRF increases the data reuse of key applications and
relieves the bandwidth requirement on the L1 SCM interconnect.
Therefore, we elect a streamlined VPU with a small VRF to
1Available at https://github.com/pulp-platform/spatz
3
L1 Instruction Cache
L1 Interconnect
L1
SPM
...
Bank
1
Bank
2
Bank
3
Bank
4
Bank
5
Bank
M
RemotePorts
PE1 VRF
FPU1 FPUF
...
...
PE2 VRF
FPU1 FPUF
...
...
PEC VRF
FPU1 FPUF
...
...
...
Figure 1. A shared-L1 cluster design with C PEs, each controlling F FPUs,
and a multi-banked L1 Scratchpad Memory (SPM) with M SRAM banks.
act as the PE of a shared-L1 cluster, depicted in Figure 1. We
choose a shared-L1 cluster as an architectural template because
of its modularity and ample adoption from System-on-Chips
(SoCs) for edge-AI [3] to Graphics Processing Units (GPUs)
[19]. In our proposed architecture, the VRF size is used as
an architectural knob to balance the bandwidth and energy
cost of an L1 SRAM with the size and energy cost of the
L0 SCM [20]. If the VPU achieves a high compute/control
ratio, we can explore the capacity/bandwidth trade-off without
needing large VRFs.
The VPU is based on the RVV extension version 1.0 of
the open-source RISC-V ISA [11]. The extension adds 32
architectural vector registers, v0 to v31, each with VLENB bytes.
We assume that the VPU operates on vector elements 8-B wide.
Therefore, each vector register has vl = VLENB/8 vector elements.
Furthermore, the RVV extension adds the concept of a vector
register group so that a single vector instruction can operate
on multiple vector registers. The Vector Length Multiplier
(LMUL) ℓ, with ℓ ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8}, represents how many vector
registers are combined to form a vector register group. As a
result, LMUL trades available vector registers against longer
vectors at runtime. Taking it into account, RVV provides 32/ℓ
vector registers, each with ℓ × VLENB/8 elements.
We implement the VRF as a multi-banked, multi-ported,
latch-based SCM. We consider the exploration of an SCM-
based memory as strategic due to the slowdown of SRAM
scaling. In fact, modern AI accelerators often use SCM [21].
The 32 VLENB bytes of the VRF are divided into two SCM
banks with three read ports and one write port (3R1W) and
16 VLENB bytes each. A single 3R1W SCM cut can provide
enough bandwidth for executing the vfmacc.vv instruction
and multiple SCM banks ensure that other instructions can
execute concurrently with the high-bandwidth vector multiply-
accumulate instructions. Furthermore, since all operands of a
vector instruction can be read simultaneously, we can forgo any
“operand buffers” to time-multiplex the VRF operand fetching.
Figure 2 shows the architecture of a 3R1W latch-based SCM
with R rows, each W-bytes wide. This SCM architecture is
similar to that of [22], [23], with manually-inserted Integrated
Clock Gating (ICG) cells gating the many clocks reaching the
latch array. Besides the clock (CLK), write enable (WE), write
address (WADDR), and write data (WDATA) ports, the SCM also
has a write byte strobe (WBE) port to select which bytes are
written at each write transaction. The write data is stored in
registers before being stored in the latch array. The three read
address (RADDR[i]) ports directly control muxes that select a
row to forward to the corresponding read data (RDATA[i]) port.
Each cell of the storage array comprises eight data latches
and an AND2 standard cell, 28 GE in total. For comparison,
an equivalent storage array cell based on multi-bit flip-flop
standard cells would occupy 49 GE.
WADDR
DEC
A R
WWL
CLK
WE
D Q
WDATA
W
D Q
WDATA
W-1
D Q
WDATA
1
ICG
WBEW WBEW-1 WBE1
...
WWLR
D Q
MW[32]
WWL1
RADDR[1]
A
RDATA
W
[1]
MUX
RADDR[2]
A
RADDR[3]
A
...
...
8 8 8
D Q
MW[1]
...
...
8
...
8
D Q
MW-1[32]
8
D Q
MW-1[1]
MUX
8
RDATA
W-1
[1]
...
...
D
M1[32]
...
...
8
D Q
M1[1]
MUX
8
RDATA
1
[1]
Sampling
Registers
Latch Array
Q
Figure 2. Architecture of a 3R1W latch-based SCM with R W-byte-wide
rows, for a total capacity K = WR bytes.
We implemented the SCM of Figure 2 with Synopsys’ Fusion
Compiler 2022.03, for many combinations of W and R, at
950 MHz in worst-case conditions (SS, 0.72 V, 125 °C) using
GlobalFoundries’ 12LPP advanced 12 nm FinFET node. Then,
we used Synopsys’ PrimePower 2022.03 to measure its read and
write energy consumption, initialized with random numbers, at
1 GHz and nominal operating conditions (TT, 0.80 V, 25 °C).
Those results are summarized in Figure 3.
0.1
1
10
8 16 32 64
W [B]
Read
Energy
[pJ]
R = 64
R = 32
R = 16
0.1
1
10
8 16 32 64
W [B]
Write
Energy
[pJ]
Figure 3. Energy consumption of a 3R1W latch-based SCM with R rows of
width W and capacity K = WR bytes. The dashed lines correspond to the
functions in Equations (1) and (2).
We interpolate the read and write energy consumption
of the SCM as a polynomial function on the SCM width
4
W and capacity K. Using the least-squares algorithm to fit
parameterized functions to the points of Figure 3, it costs
ε̃read
L0 (W, K) = 47.759W + 0.018WK + 0.275K fJ (1)
to read W bytes out of the SCM, and
ε̃write
L0 (W, K) = 72.077W + 0.006WK + 3.111K fJ (2)
to write W bytes into the SCM. For comparison, it costs
ε̃read
L1 = 4.63 pJ to read and ε̃write
L1 = 5.77 pJ to write 8 bytes
into a 1RW SRAM of capacity 8 KiB in the same technology.
We can gain further insight into the L0 and L1 energy
consumption by normalizing the cost per byte accessed. For
example, it takes 0.58 pJ/B to read data from an 1RW SRAM
of width 8 B and capacity 8 KiB. According to our model, it
takes 35% less energy, only 0.38 pJ/B, to read data from an
L0 SCM with the same capacity and width. This comparison
is not favorable towards the SRAMs since our model does
not scale to this capacity (the largest 8-B-wide SCM we
considered has a capacity of only 512 B). However, our results
back our conclusion that latch-based SCMs are an energy-
efficient approach for building small-capacity storage buffers.
Unfortunately, this SCM with a capacity of 8 KiB would be at
least 25× larger than its equivalent SRAM, which constitutes
a major drawback of latch-based SCMs with large capacity.
In the following section, we will discuss how to tune the
SCM-based VRF capacity to a target workload to minimize
the overall energy consumption of a shared-L1 computing
cluster. In particular, we consider the L1 SPM to have a fixed
configuration. An extension of this work would be the multi-
variate optimization of the cluster’s energy consumption as a
function of both the L0 SCM and L1 SPM configurations. This
multi-variate analysis requires a model of the SRAM energy
consumption, which could be inferred from either commercial
or open-source memory macro generators.
III. MATCHING WORKLOAD AND VRF FOR OPTIMAL
EFFICIENCY
Equipped with the efficient SCM VRF architecture of
Section II and its compact energy consumption model, we
now shift our focus to the shared-L1 cluster efficiency. This
section provides a quantitative analysis of the trade-off between
the VRF (L0) SCM capacity and the L1 SRAM bandwidth,
which influences the architecture’s energy efficiency. Higher
VRF sizes improve the data reuse of certain applications
(reducing their bandwidth requirements) at the expense of
higher read/write energy consumption.
For this study, we generalize the model of Choi et al.
[24], applying their analysis to our hybrid SRAM and SCM-
based memory hierarchy. The presented method can be used
to match the VRF size with the target workload executed
by the architecture. As an example, we discuss the VRF
sizing considering a target workload dominated by matrix
multiplication 2
. We focus our study on the multiplication
of two double-precision floating-point matrices, C ← A · B.
For a more precise tuning on multiple target applications,
2Most of the Deep Neural Network (DNN) models introduced in the last
decade are dominated by matrix multiplication [25].
the analysis can be repeated for every kernel, and the results
weighted together to select the optimal VRF size.
Figure 1 shows the architecture of a shared-L1 cluster
equipped with compact vector PEs. The C PEs control F
double-precision FPUs each. Each PE has a VRF divided
into two 3R1W SCM banks, each 8F-bytes wide. Since the
F double-precision FPUs of each PE produce 8F bytes per
cycle, a single 3R1W SCM bank provides enough bandwidth
to sustain F FMAs per cycle. Furthermore, the L1 SPM is
implemented as 16 SRAM banks of 8 KiB each, 128 KiB. All
matrices are n × n and are preallocated in the cluster’s SPM.
Kung’s balance principle states that the machine’s inherent
balance point should be no greater than the algorithm’s
arithmetic intensity [20]. The architectural balance relationship
is generalized by [26], considering the machine’s degree of
memory parallelism and the algorithm’s degree of compute par-
allelism. Applying the relationship to the matrix multiplication
kernel on our shared-L1 cluster, we find that
CF
β
≤
√
Z, (3)
where β is the PE’s bandwidth into the L1 SPM, and Z is the
total capacity of a PE’s VRF. Therefore, if we increase the
VRF capacity by a factor α, i.e., Z′
= αZ, we can decrease
the L1 bandwidth by a factor β′
= β/
√
α without changing the
machine’s balance. In other words, we can trade L0 capacity
against L1 bandwidth to relax the physical scalability issue of
the PE-to-L1 interconnect. Furthermore, we can exploit the L0
capacity knob to optimize the cluster’s energy efficiency.
Our model assumes that the matrix multiplication is a
representative kernel for data-parallel workloads. Ultimately,
we will optimize the energy efficiency of the shared-L1 cluster
running a matrix multiplication and expect its energy efficiency
for other kernels to be near-optimal. Thanks to lean PEs, kernels
with even higher arithmetic intensity (e.g., 2D convolution)
will run efficiently thanks to the low overhead of a small
controller. Nevertheless, for memory-bound kernels, it still
makes sense to have some L0 SCM. Namely, when performance
and memory bandwidth are well-matched (i.e., the kernel is
only marginally memory-bound), some L0 storage helps hide
the memory latency from upper memory levels. In an alternative
direction of exploration for future work, highly memory-bound
kernels could bypass the L0 SCM completely and operate
directly on elements from the L1 SPM [27].
A. Energy Consumption Model
In the following, we will analyze the energy consumption
of each major component of the shared-L1 cluster.
1) FPUs: Assume that the FPUs achieve peak utilization,
i.e., each executes one FMA per cycle. If it costs ε̃FPU pJ for
an FPU to execute an FMA instruction, the CF FPUs consume
εFPU = CFε̃FPU pJ/cycle. (4)
2) PEs: It costs ε̃′
PE pJ for a PE to fetch, decode, and
dispatch the i instructions of the kernel’s hot loop. This
loop is three instructions long in a typical vectorized matrix
multiplication kernel [16]. Therefore, on average, each PE
5
would consume ε̃PE ≜ ε̃′
PE/i pJ every cycle to fetch, issue, and
dispatch the instructions of the hot loop, as long as the PE
sustains an Instructions Per Cycle (IPC) rate of 1.
The vector-SIMD abstraction amortizes this von-Neumann-
related bottleneck in two ways. First, the instruction issue
cost of each PE is amortized by its F FPUs running in
parallel. Furthermore, since each vector instruction potentially
encodes enough micro-operations to keep the FPU datapath
busy for many cycles, the PE can keep the FPUs completely
utilized at a lower IPC. As discussed in Section II, each of
the 32/ℓ vector registers has ℓ × VLENB/8 elements. Since the
FPUs produce F elements per cycle, a vector instruction
takes ℓ × VLENB/8F cycles to execute. In particular, our matrix
multiplication implementation uses ℓ = 4. Therefore, the C
PEs consume
εPE = ε̃PE
2CF
VLENB
pJ/cycle. (5)
3) L0 SCM: The F FPUs of each PE must each be able to
fetch three double-precision operands out of the VRF to achieve
a peak collective result throughput of F double-precision
results per cycle without any hazards. Since each SCM bank
is 16 VLENB B large, we can apply Equations (1) and (2) to
estimate that, because of the FPU accesses, the L0 of the C
PEs consume, on average,
εL0 = C[3ε̃read
L0 (8F, 16 VLENB)+ε̃write
L0 (8F, 16 VLENB)] pJ/cycle.
(6)
4) L1 SPM: Since the FPUs operate on operands stored in
the L0 SCM, we must account for the data movement cost
between the two memory hierarchy levels in the shared-L1
cluster. We will split the analysis into transfers from L0 to L1
and vice-versa. First, regardless of the L0 capacity, we must
move n2
elements from the L0 to the L1, corresponding to
the n2
elements of matrix C. Assuming that the n × n matrix
multiplication kernel takes n3
/CF cycles to execute, i.e., we
achieve peak FPU utilization, it costs
εL0→L1 =
1
n3
/CF

n2
ε̃read
L0 (8F, 16 VLENB)
F
+ n2
ε̃write
L1

=
Cε̃read
L0 (8F, 16 VLENB) + CFε̃write
L1
n
pJ/cycle (7)
to transfer the matrix multiplication results from the L0 to
the L1. Furthermore, we can use Equation (3) to estimate
the cost of L1 to L0 transfers as a function of the L0 SCM
capacity. We assume that an FPU needs at least eight 8-B
wide registers to achieve full utilization, a total capacity of
64 bytes. This accounts for four registers to store intermediate
accumulations (since our FMA pipeline has four cycles of
latency), and four registers to hold matrix operands. In this
case, each FPU requires 2 words per cycle out of the L1 SPM,
at a cost εread
L1 = 2ε̃read
L1 pJ/cycle. Therefore, considering that
each VRF has a capacity of 32 VLENB bytes, the C PEs spend
εL1→L0 = C
"
2Fε̃read
L1 + 2ε̃write
L0 (8F, 16 VLENB)
p
32 VLENB/64
#
pJ/cycle (8)
copying elements from the L1 memory into the L0 VRF.
Therefore, data transfers between the L0 and the L1 memories
consume εL1 = εL0→L1 + εL1→L0 pJ/cycle.
B. Energy Efficiency Optimization
Assume a shared-L1 cluster implementation with C = 2
PEs, each controlling F = 4 FPUs. The eight FPUs per cluster
are similar to equivalent Snitch-based clusters [17]. Based on
an explorative implementation of the Snitch scalar core in
12-nm technology, we estimate that it costs ε̃PE = 3.6 pJ for
Snitch to fetch, decode, and dispatch an instruction of the
matrix multiplication kernel and ε̃FPU = 13.3 pJ for an FPU
to execute a double-precision FMA instruction. We can use
Equations (4) to (8) to estimate the energy consumption of the
shared-L1 cluster as a function of the vector length VLENB, as
seen in Figure 4.
8 16 32 64 128 256
0
50
100
150
200
VLENB [B]
Energy
[pJ/cycle]
εL1
εL0
εPE
εFPU
Figure 4. Breakdown of the energy consumption per cycle of the shared-L1
cluster, as a function of its vector length VLENB.
The energy breakdown highlights the benefit of a lightweight
PE. The FPUs dominate the cluster’s energy consumption,
altogether responsible for about 60% of its energy consumption.
On the other hand, Snitch is responsible for less than 1% of
the cluster’s energy consumption per cycle. Therefore, longer
vectors do little to amortize the cluster’s VNB since the
instruction dispatch overhead is negligible. Furthermore, the
breakdown also highlights the data movement overhead and
the balance between L0 and L1 energy consumption, which
together amount to 30% of the cluster’s energy consumption.
We can exploit the L0/L1 energy consumption balance to
optimize the cluster’s energy efficiency Φ while running the
matrix multiplication kernel. As seen in Figure 5, the cluster
reaches a peak energy efficiency of 106.9 GFLOPSDP/W for
a vector length of 47 B. At the closest power-of-two with the
best energy efficiency, the cluster reaches 106.4 GFLOPSDP/W
for a vector length of 64 B, with just a 0.04 ‰ deviation from
the maximum.
Assuming VLENB = 64 B, each VRF is 2 KiB large, divided
into two SCM banks with 32 rows of width 32 B, 1 KiB
large. Therefore, the C = 2 VRFs account for 4 KiB of L0
storage, compared to the 128 KiB of L1 SPM storage divided
into 16 SRAM banks. In this scenario, the FPUs consume
εFPU = 106.5 pJ/cycle, the PEs consume εPE = 0.9 pJ/cycle,
the VRFs consume εL0 = 25.7 pJ/cycle on FPUs accesses, the
data transfers between the VRFs and the L1 SPM SRAM banks
consume εL1 = 17.3 pJ/cycle, and the total energy consumed by
VRFs and L1 memory banks every cycle is 29.8 pJ/cycle and
6
8 16 32 64 128 256
90
95
100
105
110
VLENB [B]
Efficiency
[GFLOPS
DP
/W]
Figure 5. Energy efficiency Φ of the cluster executing a 256 × 256 matrix
multiplication kernel, as a function of the vector length VLENB.
13.3 pJ/cycle, respectively. Furthermore, each vector instruction
takes 8 cycles to execute.
Applying Equation (3), we expect the PEs to fetch about 3 L1
words per cycle. Since the cluster has M = 16 SRAM banks,
we have enough bandwidth for a Direct Memory Access (DMA)
engine to concurrently load data from an external L2 memory
into the L1 SPM while the PEs execute their computations.
We can assess our model’s robustness through a sensitivity
analysis. Namely, we assess how much the VLENB that mini-
mizes the cluster’s energy efficiency fluctuates in response to
relative changes to the model parameters. In this analysis, we
used 10% changes, and reported the most important sensitivity
parameters in Table I. For example, since εFPU does not depend
on VLENB, the vector length that maximizes the cluster’s energy
efficiency does not depend on ε̃FPU.
Table I
SENSITIVITY OF THE ENERGETICALLY-OPTIMAL SHARED-L1 CLUSTER’S
VLENB TO THE MODEL’S PARAMETERS. α, β, AND γ ARE THE COEFFICIENTS
OF EQUATION (1) AND EQUATION (2).
Parameter Sensitivity10% Parameter Sensitivity10%
ε̃FPU +0.00 B β̃read
L0 −0.80 B
ε̃PE +0.39 B γ̃read
L0 −0.40 B
ε̃read
L1 +2.40 B α̃write
L0 +0.30 B
ε̃write
L1 +0.00 B β̃write
L0 −0.11 B
α̃read
L0 +0.00 B γ̃write
L0 −1.71 B
The quantitative conclusions of this section are based on an
idealized vector-based shared-L1 cluster whose workload is
dominated by matrix multiplications. The proposed VRF sizing
method can be applied to different applications to show the
energy efficiency trade-off caused by varying the arithmetic
intensity of the application and the read/write energy of the
VRF. Based on this analysis, applications with no data reuse or
whose data reuse does not depend on their tiling will, therefore,
prefer lower VRF sizes. However, a VRF can also be useful
to better tolerate memory latency, especially in architectures
with a higher-latency memory hierarchy (this is not the case
for our L1-based cluster).
Throughout the remainder of this publication, we will build
out a shared-L1 cluster, starting with the design of the lean
Spatz VPU as its PE. We size Spatz’s VRF as just discussed
due to the centrality of the matrix multiplication kernel and to
provide a practical verification of the numbers hypothesized in
this Section for our theoretical analysis.
IV. SPATZ: A COMPACT VECTOR PROCESSING UNIT
Spatz is a compact parametric VPU based on the RISC-
V Vector Extension (RVV) version 1.0. Figure 6 shows the
microarchitecture of SpatzF, a Spatz instance with F FPUs, and
its integration with a shared-L1 cluster. Snitch and Spatz form
a Core Complex (CC) integrated within a shared-L1 cluster
with 16 SRAM banks of 8 KiB each. This section describes
Spatz’ architecture, highlighting its main components.
XIF
I$ Port
Snitch
Controller
VRF
Bank 0
v3
64
F
Interfaces
VLSU
VAU
VSLDU
ROB
FPUs
IPUs
...
64
64
CSRs Scoreboard FPU Sequencer
64
XIF
64
FPR
v2
v1
v0
Bank 1
F+1
Interfaces
64
SpatzF
...
64
64
64F 64F 64F 64F 64F
64F
64F 64F
64F
Figure 6. Microarchitecture of the Spatz-based CC, containing a Spatz instance
with F FPUs, G IPUs, and a Snitch scalar core. Snitch and Spatz communicate
through CORE-V’s X-Interface (XIF). Each Spatz instance has F + 1 64-bit
memory interfaces.
A. Instruction Dispatch
Spatz implements the RVV ISA, version 1.0 [11]. We target
the Zve64d subset, designed for embedded vector machines
with 8, 16, 32, and 64-bit integer and floating-point support.
Furthermore, we also provide a Spatz configuration targeting
the Zve32x RVV subset, with support for 8, 16, and 32-bit
integer operations, presented in [13]. Spatz is processor-agnostic
and communicates with the scalar core through CORE-V’s X-
Interface accelerator interface [28]. Therefore, Spatz can be
used with any core compatible with the X-Interface. Snitch’s
small footprint is particularly adapted for an execution paradigm
where most of the computation happens in the vector unit.
Since the accelerator interface specification is still in its
infancy, it needs to be better adapted to the memory bandwidth
requirements of a vector machine. We extended the X-Interface
to consider cases where the accelerator makes its memory
access through a wider memory interface than the scalar cores’
one. Furthermore, we guarantee the ordering between Spatz’
and Snitch’s memory requests by stalling the scalar core’s
Load/Store Unit (LSU) while Spatz’ Vector Load/Store Unit
(VLSU) executes a memory operation and vice-versa.
B. Controller
Snitch only pre-decodes vector instructions, dispatching the
vector instruction and any scalar operands to the vector unit.
7
Spatz’ controller decodes the vector instructions, keeps track of
their execution, and acknowledges their completion with Snitch.
The controller also manages the Control and State Registers
(CSRs) of the RVV ISA. For example, the vlen CSR defines
the vector length of all vector instructions. Another important
CSR is vtype, which controls the vector elements’ width and
the vector register grouping LMUL. Finally, the controller
orchestrates the execution of the vector instructions in the
functional units. The scoreboard keeps track of the element-
wise progression of each vector instruction. Hazards between
vector instructions are handled through operand backpressure.
In addition, Spatz supports vector chaining on an element basis.
Within the controller, the FPU Sequencer manages the scalar
Floating-Point Register File (FPR). It implements a simple
scoreboard to manage access to instructions that access the FPR,
e.g., vector instruction with scalar floating-point operands and
scalar floating-point instructions. Furthermore, the sequencer
also manages scalar floating-point memory operations, hence
its dedicated 64-bit memory interface. The FPU sequencer is
only instantiated when Spatz is configured with FPU support.
C. Vector Register File
The VRF is the core of any vector machine. We implemented
Spatz’ VRF as a multi-banked multi-ported register file with
two 3R1W banks. Each bank is implemented as a latch-based
SCM. The VRF is centralized and serves all functional units.
Its ports match the throughput requirements of the vfmacc
instruction, which reads three double-precision operands to
produce one double-precision result. Each bank is VLENB/2
bytes wide, and each of the 32 VLENB-byte vector registers
occupies one row in each of the two VRF banks. Each VRF
port is 64F-bit wide. We studied Spatz’ VRF in Section II.
The centralized VRF helps the implementation of vector
instructions with irregular access patterns, e.g., vector slides
(vd[i] ← vs[i ± shamt]) and reductions (vd[0] ← Σivs[i]).
Namely, a lane-based vector architecture, where the vector
registers of the VRF are divided into lanes based on their index
i, would need extra logic to shuffle the elements and store them
in the correct lane, with important scalability implications [16].
D. Functional Units
Spatz has three functional units: the VLSU, the Vector
Arithmetic Unit (VAU), and the Vector Slide Unit (VSLDU).
1) Vector Arithmetic Unit: The VAU is Spatz’ main func-
tional unit, hosting F transprecision FPUs [29] and G IPUs.
Each FPU supports fp8, fp16, fp32, and fp64 computation.
Each IPU supports 8-bit, 16-bit, 32-bit, and 64-bit computation.
All functional units maintain a throughput of 64 bit/cycle,
regardless of the element width. Spatz decouples the number of
integer G and floating-point F functional units. Therefore, we
can tune Spatz to focus on integer or floating-point workloads.
This paper will analyze the case where G = 1. Therefore, Spatz
mainly focuses on floating-point workloads, with the integer dat-
apath mainly used for address computations. Furthermore, we
also reuse Spatz’ datapath to execute some scalar instructions
by reinterpreting scalar multiplications, integer divisions, and
floating-point operations as vector instructions of unit length
that commit into the GPR. Our workloads did not have enough
of those scalar instructions to deserve a dedicated functional
unit, as derived from our performance results. Thanks to this
datapath reuse, we can reduce the scalar core area and energy
overhead. A leaner scalar core has a smaller ε̃PE, reducing the
vector length that reaches maximal energy efficiency.
Our FPUs include the ExSdotp extension of [30]. This
FPU computational unit implements the widening sum-of-dot-
products operation. It takes four operands expressed in w-bits
and an accumulator input 2w-bits wide to compute a sum of
dot products also 2w-bits wide,
ExSdotp2w = awbw + cwdw + e2w. (9)
This operation is particularly useful for ML applications. In
this scenario, we achieve a smaller memory footprint thanks to
the narrow operand width while retaining high precision thanks
to the wide accumulation result. Our widening and sum-of-
dot-products floating-point engines address the accuracy loss
associated with accumulating low-bitwidth numbers encoded
with low-precision formats. Therefore, our workloads target
w = 8 bit and w = 16 bit, although we have the hardware to
accumulate 32-bit elements into a 64-bit accumulator.
Our previous publication [13] analyzed Spatz’ performance
as an integer VPU. However, since integer computations are
energetically cheaper than floating-point computations, data
movement is responsible for a larger fraction of the cluster’s
overall energy consumption. Therefore, the analysis of this
paper is a “worst-case scenario” concerning the benefits of
vector processing since the cluster’s power consumption is
dominated by the FPUs, as seen in Figure 4.
2) Vector Load/Store Unit: The VLSU handles the memory
interfaces of Spatz, with support for unit-strided, constant-
strided, and indexed memory accesses. The VLSU supports
a parametric number of 64-bit wide memory interfaces. By
default, the number of memory interfaces F matches the
number of Functional Units (FUs) in the design. This implies a
peak operation per memory bandwidth ratio of 0.25 FLOPDP/B.
Spatz’ independent and narrow memory interfaces allow
the reuse of the same 64-bit wide L1 SPM interconnect used
by the scalar cores. The independent interfaces also allow
fast execution of constant-strided and scatter-gather memory
operations, as the VLSU does not need to coalesce requests
into wide memory transfers. However, since the L1 SPM
interconnect does not guarantee the ordering between the
responses of the individual memory requests, a Reorder Buffer
(ROB) sits between the memory interfaces and the VRF. The
ROB ensures that the memory responses are written in order
to the VRF, simplifying Spatz’ vector chaining mechanism.
3) Vector Slide Unit: The VSLDU executes vector permuta-
tion instructions. Examples of such instructions include vector
slide up/down and vector moves. The unit operates on two
private 64F-bit-wide register banks. Between those two register
banks, an all-to-all interconnect allows the implementation
of any permutation scheme. Common operations, e.g., slides,
produce results at 64F bits per cycle ratio, which matches
Spatz’ other functional units’ peak throughput. The register
banks also play a role similar to the ROB of Spatz’ VLSU. The
VSLDU double-buffers on those registers and ensures that the
8
unit commits to the VRF in 64F-bit-wide words, simplifying
the chaining calculation in the scoreboard.
V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
We implemented a shared-L1 cluster with two Spatz-based
CCs, each controlling four FPUs and an IPU. The cluster has
eight double-precision FPUs, 4 KiB of L0 VRF, 8 KiB of L1
Instruction Cache (I$), and 128 KiB of SPM divided into 16
banks. The cluster’s architecture can be seen in Figure 7.
L1 Instruction Cache
L1 Interconnect
L1
SPM
...
Bank
1
Bank
2
Bank
3
Bank
4
Bank
5
Bank
16
Spatz1
FPU1 FPU4
... IPU
VRF
2 KiB
Snitch
1
128
KiB
Spatz2
FPU1 FPU4
... IPU
VRF
2 KiB
Snitch
2
8 KiB
64 64 64 64 64 64 64 64 64 64
64 64 64 64 64 64
10 masters × 16 slaves
64-bit-wide crossbar
64 64
Figure 7. A shared-L1 cluster with two Spatz PEs, each controlling four
multi-precision FPUs and one IPU, and a multi-banked L1 SPM with 128 KiB.
The Spatz-based cluster’s performance metrics were then
evaluated using a set of common data-parallel workloads,
matmul: Matrix multiplication between two n × n double-
precision floating point matrices;
wid-matmulw: Widening matrix multiplication of two n × n
matrices of element width w into a matrix of width 2w;
conv2d: 2D convolution of a double-precision floating point
matrix of size n × n with a kernel of size 7 × 7.
dotp: Scalar product between two double-precision, floating-
point vectors of length n;
fft: Implementation of Cooley-Tukey’s Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) algorithm on a vector with n complex double-
precision floating point samples.
All kernels operate on data residing in the cluster’s L1 mem-
ory. Furthermore, all workloads operate on double-precision
floating-point elements, except wid-matmulw, which targets
low-precision floating-point formats instead. The performance
results were extracted with a cycle-accurate Register Transfer
Level (RTL) simulation of the target workloads. Table II
summarizes the cluster’s performance and FPU utilization.
We will assess the power, performance, and area (PPA) of
the Spatz-based cluster against a baseline scalar cluster using
eight Snitch cores as PEs. Snitch is a single-issue core, and its
instruction issue rate limits the performance of the scalar shared-
L1 cluster. Therefore, we will compare all cluster metrics
against a specialized Snitch-based cluster implementing SSRs,
a stream-based ISA extension. In particular, RISC-V floating
point instructions access the FPR, while most bookkeeping
instructions access the GPR instead [9]. SSRs exploit this to
implement an energy efficient pseudo-double-issue execution
Table II
SPATZ CLUSTER’S MULTI-CORE PERFORMANCE AND FPU UTILIZATION.
Benchmark n Perf. [FLOP/cycle] Util. [%]
matmul
16 11.57 72.3
32 15.00 93.8
64 15.67 97.9
wid-matmul16
64 57.53 89.9
128 61.52 96.1
wid-matmul8
64 112.9 88.2
128 121.8 95.2
conv2d
32 14.91 93.2
64 15.20 95.0
dotp
256 1.67 10.4
4096 5.45 34.0
fft
128 3.43 34.2
256 4.01 40.1
between floating-point and integer instructions [12]. With
hardware loops to remove branches and the elision of explicit
memory load and store instructions, the Snitch-based SSR
cluster is highly competitive with the Spatz cluster. The SSR
Snitch cluster is, therefore, much more efficient than a vanilla
scalar Snitch cluster, as SSRs with hardware loops can stream
vectors of data to/from the cores by means of a few dedicated
instructions. In a high-level sense, the main difference between
those clusters is the number of ports in the L1 interconnect.
From an application perspective, the SSR cluster executes
eight scalar RISC-V threads boosted with SSR instructions,
while the Spatz cluster deals with two RVV threads. Due to its
small GPR capacity, each SSR-capable Snitch core has three
memory ports (24 initiators in total) into the SPM interconnect,
all connected to 32 SRAM banks. In contrast, Spatz’ VRF
allows for more data reuse and, consequently, for a reduction
in L1 SPM bandwidth. Each Spatz CC has four ports into the
L1 SPM (eight ports in total), all connected to 16 SRAM banks.
We also note that RVV is a standard extension with compiler
support and widespread community usage, unlike SSRs, which
are a non-standard ISA extension.
Figure 8 shows the speed-up of the Spatz-based and
SSR-based clusters versus the Snitch-based baseline clus-
ter on a set of data-parallel workloads. For example,
Spatz achieves 15.46 FLOPDP/cycle (96.6% of the theoret-
ical peak performance) running a 64 × 64 matrix multipli-
cation. This is 5.2× higher than the baseline performance,
2.99 FLOPDP/cycle. Meanwhile, the SSR-based cluster achieves
14.67 FLOPDP/cycle, a 4.9× speed-up versus the baseline. A
similar trend is also seen for the conv2d kernel, with the Spatz-
based and SSR-based achieving 6.8× and 6.5× speed-ups
versus the baseline Snitch-based cluster, respectively.
We also achieve high performance with the wid-matmul16, a
widening matrix multiplication that operates on 16-bit floating
point operands and accumulates in a 32-bit register. In this
scenario, the 64-bit ExSdotp [30] datapath of each FPU can ex-
ecute four half-precision FMAs per cycle. For a large 128 × 128
matrix multiplication, Spatz reaches 61.5 FLOPSHP/cycle, an
FMA utilization of 96.1%. In comparison, the SSR-based
cluster achieves 52.0 FLOPSHP/cycle on the same kernel, an
9
0
2
4
6
8
matmul conv2d dotp fft
1
3
5
7
Benchmark
Speed-up
Baseline
SSR
Spatz
Figure 8. Bar plot of Spatz and SSR-based cluster’s speed-ups versus the
Snitch baseline cluster on a set of data-parallel workloads. All clusters have the
same number of FPUs and, therefore, the same peak achievable performance.
The fourth, lighter bar in the dotp kernel indicates the speedup of a Spatz
cluster with twice as many VLSU interfaces in the L1 SPM.
FPU utilization 15.5% lower than that of the Spatz cluster.
Similar trends are seen for lower precision, e.g., wid-matmul8.
In general, SSR’s performance drop on the matmul and
conv2d kernels is explained due to banking conflicts in the L1
SPM, which degrade the performance of SSR-based solutions
due to their high L1 SPM bandwidth requirements. Namely,
since SSRs have very little data reuse, each SSR-powered
Snitch core reads two elements and writes one element back to
the L1 SPM per cycle. This implies that 24 out of the 32 L1
SPM SRAM banks are used per cycle. However, the SSR-based
cluster performs better on the dotp kernel. The Spatz-based
cluster reaches a 1.44× speed-up versus the baseline, while the
SSR-based cluster reaches a speed-up close to 3× versus the
baseline. This is due to dotp’s very low data reuse, which forces
to fetch two 64-bit elements from the L1 SPM for each FMA
operation. The SSR-based cluster’s large L1 SPM interconnect
and three memory ports per core can supply this throughput to
the FPUs. On the other hand, the smaller L1 interconnect of
the Spatz cluster can provide a single 64-bit element per cycle
to each FPU, throttling the execution of the dotp kernel.
It is important to mention that the performance difference
between Spatz and the SSR cluster on low data-reuse kernels,
e.g., dotp., primarily depends on the current Spatz configuration
and micro-architecture. A Spatz cluster with 2F L1 SPM
interfaces per VLSU and streamlined reduction logic can
achieve a dotp speedup similar to the SSR-based cluster
while still featuring a lower number of ports in the L1 SPM
interconnect (16 versus 24), as shown in Figure 8 by the lighter
bar relative to the dotp kernel. On the other hand, we should
note that low-compute intensive kernels like dotp are often
bottlenecked at the cluster memory interface or at the off-chip
memory controller, weakening the motivation for the local
complexity increase.
The fft kernel exemplifies the cluster’s performance on
workloads with non-linear access patterns in the L1 Memory.
The SSR-based cluster achieves up to 1.91 FLOPSDP/cycle
on an FFT with 128 double-precision complex samples,
3.2× faster than the baseline cluster. The low speed-up
is due to the frequent synchronization between the FFT
stages [12]. On the other hand, the Spatz-based cluster achieves
3.43 FLOPSDP/cycle on the same problem, 5.8× faster than
the baseline. Spatz benefits from a fast scatter-gather execution
mechanism (Section IV-D2). Furthermore, since many FFT
butterflies execute within a Spatz core, there is much less need
for intra-Spatz atomic synchronization.
VI. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
This section analyzes the PPA figures of merit of a Spatz-
based shared-L1 cluster with key data-parallel workloads.
A. Methodology
We used Synopsys Fusion Compiler 2022.03 to synthesize,
place, and route the cluster with GlobalFoundries’ 12LPP
12 nm advanced FinFET node. We target a minimum operating
frequency of 950 MHz under worst-case conditions (SS, 0.72 V,
125 °C). Furthermore, we used Synopsys PrimeTime 2022.02
for sign-off Static Timing Analysis (STA) and power estimation
under nominal conditions (TT, 0.80 V, 25 °C) at 1 GHz using
switching activities extracted from gate-level simulations.
B. Area Analysis and Breakdown
Each Spatz-based CC is about 1.01 MGE large. Figure 9
shows a post-implementation area breakdown of this CC,
highlighting its main blocks. The VAU is the largest block, with
its 694 kGE occupying 69% of the CC’s area. Within the VAU,
each FPU is 142 kGE large, with the remaining 126 kGE being
occupied by the IPU—particularly by its 64-bit multiplier—and
by the vector reduction logic. The VRF occupies 169 kGE, 17%
of the CC’s area. The remaining blocks have small contributions
to the CC’s area, with Snitch’s 25 kGE, in particular, occupying
only 2.5% of the CC’s overall footprint.
FPUs
IPU
VRF
VLSU
Snitch
Other
Figure 9. Post-implementation area distribution of the Spatz-based CC,
1.01-MGE-large. The slices correspond to (A) FPUs, 568 kGE; (B) IPU,
126 kGE; (C) VRF, 169 kGE; (D) VLSU, 46 kGE; (E) Snitch, 25 kGE; (O)
other smaller blocks, e.g., VSLDU, FPU sequencer, and controller, 76 kGE.
The cluster was implemented as a block of dimensions
737 µm × 1003 µm, 0.74 mm2
in total. Figure 10 shows the
placed-and-routed Spatz-based shared-L1 cluster, highlighting
its main hierarchical blocks. The cluster was implemented
with an overall standard cell density of 52%. The L1 SPM
interconnect and the VRF are routing-intensive blocks and
achieve a lower utilization of the standard cell area. For
example, while highly-computational blocks such as the FPUs
10
VRF
VRF
L1 SPM
I$
Snitch
Snitch
IPU 1
FPU 1
FPU 2
FPU 3
FPU 4
FPU 5
FPU 6
FPU 7
FPU 8
IPU 2
Figure 10. Placed-and-routed Spatz-based shared-L1 cluster, implemented as
a 737 µm × 1003 µm block. The cluster’s main blocks are highlighted: namely
the Snitch cores, VRFs, IPUs, FPUs, L1 SPM, and I$.
achieve a standard cell utilization of 60%, the VRFs are placed
and routed at a standard cell utilization of 49%.
The critical path of the Spatz cluster starts at Snitch’s L0 I$,
through the Snitch core and Spatz’ instruction decoder. This
critical path is about 45-gates long. Furthermore, another long
path starting at the L0 I$ and through Snitch (without leaving
the core) is about the same length. Therefore, Spatz’ inclusion
does not limit the cluster operating frequency, which is the
same as that of the scalar Snitch-based cluster [17].
C. Energy Breakdown
We measured the energy consumption per elementary opera-
tion of the Spatz-based cluster in nominal operating conditions
at 1 GHz, using switching activities extracted from a gate-
level simulation. Figure 11 shows Spatz’ energy breakdown
when running the vload (load), vfadd (floating-point addition),
vfmul (floating-point multiplication), and vfmacc (floating-
point multiply-accumulate) double-precision instructions.
fmacc
fmul
fadd
load
27.1 pJ
23.9 pJ
20.0 pJ
14.1 pJ
6.5 pJ
18.1 pJ
16.2 pJ
12.5 pJ
6.5 pJ
5.0 pJ
5.0 pJ
Snitch
VRF
VAU
VLSU
SPM
Figure 11. Breakdown of the Spatz-based cluster’s energy consumption per
elementary operation of several vector instructions.
Snitch consumes only 0.19 pJ per elementary operation
while issuing instructions to the vector unit. The low energy
requirement is because Snitch only needs to issue an instruction
every 32 cycles to keep Spatz’ FPUs fully utilized. For the
computational operations, the FPUs are responsible for most of
Spatz’ energy consumption, up to 67% of the cluster’s overall
energy consumption when running the vfmacc instruction,
followed by the VRF, which is responsible for 24%. Also of
note is the reduction in VRF energy consumption between
the vfadd and vfmul instructions, which read two operands
and write one result to the VRF per cycle, and the vfmacc
instruction, which reads an additional third operand.
Each FPU of the Spatz cluster consumes 18.1 pJ to execute
an FMA operation while executing the vfmacc instruction. This
εFPU value is 38% higher than what we estimated from [12]’s
results, lowering our cluster’s expected energy efficiency.
Adding packed-SIMD support and including low-precision
floating-point formats justify and explain the efficiency drop.
The FPU implementation of [29], which has packed-SIMD
vector support, consumes 26.1 pJ to execute a double-precision
FMA operation, in line with what we measure in Spatz.
It is important to note that the numbers of Figure 11 are not
directly comparable with the previous Spatz publication [13]
due to the widening of its datapath from 32 bit to the current
64 bit. Furthermore, Spatz did not include FPUs, which are the
focus of this work.
D. Power Consumption and Energy Efficiency
The Spatz cluster consumes 164 mW to execute the
64 × 64 matmul kernel. Therefore, the Spatz cluster achieves
15.7 GFLOPSDP running the 64 × 64 matmul, for an energy
efficiency of 95.7 GFLOPSDP/W. Figure 12 shows a breakdown
of the power consumption of the cluster’s hierarchical blocks.
FPUs
VRF
VLSU
SPM
SPM Interconnect
Controller
Snitch
Other
Figure 12. Average power consumption breakdown of the Spatz-based
cluster running a 64 × 64 double-precision floating-point matrix multiplication.
At 1 GHz, the cluster achieves 15.7 GFLOPSDP and consumes, on average,
164 mW to execute the workload at nominal operating conditions (TT, 0.80 V,
25 °C). The slices correspond to (A) FPUs, 87 mW; (B) VRF, 34 mW; (C)
VLSU, 7.5 mW; (D) L1 SPM memories, 4.25 mW; (E) L1 SPM interconnect,
10.69 mW; (F) Spatz’ controller, 10.3 mW; (G) Snitch, 5.6 mW; (O) other
smaller hierarchical blocks, 9.1 mW.
The eight FPUs consume 87 mW, 54% of the cluster’s
overall power consumption. In comparison, the FPUs consumed
only 41% of the power consumption of the equivalent Snitch-
based cluster [12]. Furthermore, the VRF consumes 32 mW
(19%). This power consumption ratio mirrors the analysis from
Section III-B. However, we underestimated the VRF energy
consumption by 30%, probably due to timing pressure in the
VRF interface with the FUs. Spatz’ VLSU consumes 7.0 mW
(4.2%), and the L1 SPM SRAMs and interconnect consume
15.4 mW (8.0%). Finally, Spatz’ controller consumes 9.3 mW
(5.8%) and the Snitch cores and I$ consume 5.6 mW (3.4%).
E. Model Validation
As shown in Table III, our post-implementation energy
measurements correlate with the numbers used in Section III.
For example, the VRF consumes 34 pJ/cycle, 4.2 pJ/cycle
(14%) more than the model estimate. We notice a large relative
11
error in the PE energy consumption value that corresponds to
an absolute error of only 0.8 pJ/cycle. Furthermore, the relative
discrepancies between the hypothesized and measured FPU,
L0 VRF, and L1 SPM energy consumption are all less than
20%, testifying to the soundness of the shared-L1 cluster’s
energy consumption model.
Table III
DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN THE HYPOTHESIZED ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN
SECTION III AND THE POST-IMPLEMENTATION MEASURED ENERGY
CONSUMPTION.
Hypothesis [pJ] Measured [pJ] Abs. Error [pJ] Rel. Error
FPU 106.5 87 -19.5 -18%
PE 0.9 1.7 +0.8 +89%
L0 29.8 34.0 +4.2 +14%
L1 13.3 15.0 +1.7 +13%
F. PPA comparison with the SSR-based cluster
We can use other Snitch-based cluster implementations in
the literature as proxies to evaluate the area of the Spatz-
based cluster. First, the Snitch-based cluster of [12] was
implemented with GlobalFoundries’ 22FDX Fully Depleted
Silicon on Insulator (FD-SOI) node, containing 128 KiB of L1
SPM divided into 32 SRAM banks and eight double-precision
FPUs. The cluster was implemented as a block of dimensions
858 µm × 1046 µm, 0.90 mm2
in total. However, the cluster’s
FPUs did not have packed-SIMD support when running low-
precision operations, i.e., each FPU can only execute one fp64
or fp32 operation per cycle. Therefore, an area comparison
between our design and the Snitch cluster [12] would be biased
towards the smaller footprint of the latter.
For a fair comparison, we ported the Snitch cluster [12] to
GlobalFoundries’ 12LPP technology with the same frequency
target as Spatz. Furthermore, we also added packed-SIMD
support to the FPUs of the Snitch cluster [17], [30]. Figure 13a
shows the area efficiency of the Spatz-based and SSR-based
clusters on a set of data-parallel workloads. We did not consider
the area of the L1 SPM SRAM macros in the computation.
The SSR-based cluster [17] is 0.90-mm2
large, with 0.17 mm2
occupied by 128 KiB of L1 SPM. The Spatz-based cluster is
0.72 mm2
large, with 0.14 mm2
occupied by also 128 KiB of
L1 SPM. On the matmul kernel, the Spatz-based cluster reaches
up to 26.7 GFLOPSDP/mm2
, 32% higher than the efficiency
of the SSR-based cluster. More strikingly, the Spatz-based
cluster reaches an area efficiency of 5.9 GFLOPSDP/mm2
on
fft kernel, which is 2.3× larger than the 2.6 GFLOPSDP/mm2
area efficiency of the SSR-based cluster on the same kernel.
In terms of energy efficiency, Figure 13b, the Spatz cluster
reaches up to 99.3 GFLOPSDP/W. Unlike our area efficiency
calculations, we did consider the energy consumption of the
L1 SPM SRAM macros since its contribution impacts the
optimal VLENB and the number of memory accesses and the
access pattern change when changing the architecture. In
general, Spatz achieves higher energy efficiency than the SSR-
based cluster for highly compute-intensive workloads such as
matmul and conv2d. For data-intensive workloads such as dotp,
Spatz reaches 48.2 GFLOPSDP/W, 30% lower than the energy
efficiency of the SSR-based cluster on the same workload. The
dot product workload, in particular, has very little data reuse.
Therefore, transferring data from the L1 SPM to the L0 VRF
does not improve data locality, explaining the energy efficiency
drop caused by Spatz’ current bandwidth to L1 memory, which
is lower than the one in the SSR-based cluster. Finally, for the
fft kernel, Spatz reaches 32.7 GFLOPSDP/W, 48% larger than
the energy efficiency of the SSR-based cluster.
Spatz efficiency scales well for lower-precision formats. For
example, the Spatz cluster achieves 358 GFLOPSHP/W on a
128 × 128 wid-matmul16 matrix multiplication between fp16 el-
ements. This is 3.74× higher than the peak efficiency achieved
by the matmul double-precision kernel, with further energy
efficiency gains possible with the ExSdotp [30] extension.
Finally, we analyze the cluster’s combined area and energy
efficiency in Figure 13c. Thanks to the small footprint and
highly-competitive energy efficiency of the Spatz cluster, it
reaches up to 171 GFLOPSDP/mm2
/W on the conv2d workload.
This is 30% larger than the peak area/energy efficiency of the
SSR-based cluster. This implies that, under the same area
constraints, a shared-L1 cluster based on Spatz would reach
an energy efficiency 30% larger than an SSR-based cluster.
The combined area/energy efficiency of the Spatz cluster is
only 12% lower than that of the SSR-based cluster for the dotp
workload. However, for an fft, Spatz’ 56 GFLOPSDP/mm2
/W
is almost twice the achieved combined area/energy efficiency
of the SSR-based cluster on the same workload.
VII. RELATED WORK
Increasing memory capacity to lower the bandwidth re-
quirements at a higher level of the memory hierarchy is
a fundamental trade-off found in several architectures. For
instance, GPUs have a large multi-context register file, allowing
fast context switching between many concurrent threads. Each
Streaming Multiprocessor (SM) of Nvidia’s Hopper GPUs
has a 256-KiB-large register file to hold the context of up to
2048 threads [19]. Therefore, a considerable design effort is
dedicated to concurrently optimizing the capacity, bandwidth,
reliability, and power consumption of such large register
files [31]. Table IV compares our PPA metrics against the
Snitch cluster [12], Vitruvius+ [15], and Ara [16], on the
largest problem that fits each design’s SPM. Spatz is highly
competitive in sustained fraction of peak performance, as well
as in energy efficiency.
At a scale much smaller than GPUs, IoT end nodes
require high performance and energy efficiency under a tight
power budget to execute edge-AI workloads. In this scenario,
the Single Instruction, Multiple Thread (SIMT) computation
paradigm of GPUs is hard to leverage, as it requires a massive
amount of multi-threaded parallelism (and, therefore, a very
large register file). Typical IoT end nodes exploit the SIMD
computing paradigm over a moderate amount of functional
units. For example, Dustin [32] proposes a configurable Vector
Lockstep Execution Mode (VLEM), in which its 16 32-bit
cores are synchronized, and a single instruction fetch controls
all 16 datapaths. Therefore, Dustin can achieve the high energy
efficiency of packed-SIMD architectures while keeping the
12
0
10
20
30
matmulconv2d dotp fft
5
15
25
Benchmark
[GFLOPS
DP
/mm
2
]
(a) Area Efficiency.
0
20
40
60
80
100
matmulconv2d dotp fft
Benchmark
[GFLOPS
DP
/W]
(b) Energy Efficiency.
0
50
100
150
200
matmulconv2d dotp fft
Benchmark
[GFLOPS
DP
/mm
2
/W]
SSR
Spatz
(c) Combined area/energy Efficiency.
Figure 13. Efficiency metrics of the Spatz-based and SSR-based clusters on a set of data-parallel workloads at nominal conditions (1 GHz, TT, 0.80 V, 25 °C).
The considered cluster area does not include the area of the L1 SPM SRAM macros.
Table IV
COMPARISON BETWEEN SPATZ (US), SNITCH [12], VITRUVIUS+ [15], AND
ARA [16] ON AN n × n MATRIX MULTIPLICATION.
Unit Spatz Snitch Vitr. Ara
Problem size n 64 64 256 256
Node [nm] 12 12 22 22
VDD [V] 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.80
Clock (typ) [GHz] 1.26 1.30 1.40 1.35
Peak DP [GFLOPSDP] 20.16 20.80 22.40 21.6
Peak SP [GFLOPSSP] 40.32 41.60 — 43.2
Sustained DP [GFLOPSDP] 19.74 18.26 21.70 20.95
Sustained SP [GFLOPSSP] 38.81 33.75 — —
Total Power DP [W] 0.207 0.227 0.459 0.587
Efficiency DP [GFLOPSDP/W] 97.39 92.03 47.30 35.70
flexibility of the Multiple Instruction, Multiple Data (MIMD)
paradigm. In VLEM mode, the register files of the scalar
cores act as a single, 512-bit-wide register file. Unlike Spatz,
Dustin was designed for low-precision (e.g., 2-bit) integer
computation. However, its architecture highlights the trend of
compact processing elements exploiting SIMD computation.
Intel’s Advanced Vector Extension (AVX) family of ISAs also
exploits the packed-SIMD paradigm. Its widest ISA variant
proposes 32 512-bit-wide registers [33] on Intel’s line of high-
performance processors. With the recent introduction of the
AVX10 ISA, Intel introduces a common vector ISA on the
high-performance (P) product lines (e.g., Intel Xeon) and the
to-be-introduced high-efficiency (E) product line, with a shorter
256-bit vector length on the latter [34].
It is important to note that all packed-SIMD solutions tie
the register file width to the number of functional units in the
system. Thus, the L0 capacity of the GPR is not available
as an architectural tuning knob once the ISA is defined. The
vector-SIMD paradigm provides a clean abstraction to separate
the VRF capacity from the architecture’s programming model.
Specifically, the same software can run on any vector machine
thanks to Vector-Length Agnostic (VLA) parametrization:
programs automatically adjust their execution to exploit the
longest possible vector, which is impossible with packed-
SIMD architectures [35] and prohibitively expensive with GPUs.
Therefore, vector processors present the unique characteristic
of allowing a full exploration of the memory capacity and
bandwidth trade-off. Many vector processing units have been
proposed in recent years, thanks to new vector ISAs such as
Arm’s Scalable Vector Extension (SVE) [36] and RISC-V’s
RVV [11]. Examples of such large-scale vector architectures
based on the RVV ISA include BSC’s Vitruvius [15], PULP
Platform’s Ara [16], and SiFive’s P270 [37], P870 [38], and
X280 [39] cores, to name a few.
Ultimately, vector processing have historically been asso-
ciated with supercomputers [40], [41], which limited its
application to the PEs of a compact shared-L1 cluster. In fact,
vector processors usually include all microarchitectural tricks
to increase ILP and target very long vectors to amortize the
VNB [10] and the massive overheads of complex instruction
issue mechanisms. As a result, the energy efficiency of these
high-performance architectures is encumbered by their complex,
out-of-order microarchitecture [42].
However, the defining characteristic of a vector processor
is not ILP but DLP. This key observation led to the design
of streamlined vector cores where most hardware resources
are dedicated to DLP support [16]. In this vein, the idea of
an embedded vector machine is gaining traction with modern
vector ISAs. Arm’s M-Profile Vector Extension (MVE) [36]
and the Zve∗ subset of RISC-V’s RVV ISA [11] target small
vector machines for edge processing.
Arm’s Helium MVE is an optional extension proposed as part
of the Armv8.1-M architecture [36]. The Arm Cortex-M55 [43]
is the first processor to ship with support to MVE. However,
no quantitative assessment of the performance and efficiency of
a Cortex-M55 silicon implementation has been reported in the
open literature; hence, a quantitative comparison with Spatz is
impossible. For what concerns a qualitative comparison, we
observe that the Helium MVE defines eight 128-bit wide vector
registers as aliases to the floating-point register file. On the
M55 processor, the 64-bit datapath means Helium operates on a
“dual-beat regime,” i.e., vector instructions execute in two cycles.
This is enough to overlap the execution of successive vector
instructions in different processing units without a superscalar
core. However, the scalar core must frequently issue instructions
to the Helium-capable processing unit to keep its pipeline busy.
13
In contrast, Spatz’ longer vector registers and RVV’s LMUL
register grouping allow for a maximum vector length of 4096
bits, keeping Spatz busy for 32 cycles. This long execution, as
shown by our results, massively amortizes the energy overhead
of the scalar core, which is a considerable part of the overall
energy consumption even on extremely data-parallel kernels
such as the matrix multiplication.
In general, architectures based on a tightly-coupled cluster of
small vector processors have not been explored in past literature,
possibly due to the novelty of small vector machines. Small-
scale vector units have been proposed for Field-Programmable
Gate Arrays (FPGAs), where the leanness of the vector
processor is a constraint due to limited FPGA resources.
Vicuna [44] is a timing-predictable RVV-compliant vector
processor, synthesized on a Xilinx Series 7 FPGA. Its VRF
was implemented as a multi-ported Random-Access Memory
(RAM) due to concerns with timing anomalies with a multi-
banked VRF. Vicuna’s largest configuration achieves up to
117 OP/cycle on an 8-bit 1024 × 1024 matrix multiplication
kernel. Vicuna’s multi-ported VRF is similar to Spatz’ VRF.
There is no study about Vicuna’s scaling nor an Application-
Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) implementation of this
architecture, making a power or energy efficiency comparison
with Spatz difficult. The same can be said about other small-
scale RVV vector units demonstrated on FPGAs [45]–[47].
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
We introduced Spatz, an open-source highly efficient com-
pact VPU based on the RVV specification. We couple Spatz
with the lightweight Snitch core and optimize its latch-based
VRF targeting maximum energy efficiency, leveraging the RVV
ISA to boost performance. Spatz differs from typical vector
processors, whose VRFs have to be much larger to amortize
the overhead of typically-used ILP techniques (e.g., renaming
and out-of-order execution).
We use Spatz as the PE of a tightly-coupled shared-L1
cluster, comprising a set of PEs sharing tightly-coupled L1
memory through a low-latency interconnect. The Spatz cluster
contains eight multi-precision FPUs and 128 KiB of L1 SPM.
We implemented this cluster as a 0.74-mm2
-large macro with
GlobalFoundries’ FinFET 12 nm node at an operating frequency
of 950 MHz in worst-case conditions (SS, 0.72 V, 125 °C). To
the best of our knowledge, the dual-core Spatz cluster is the
first open-source multi-core RVV-based processor architecture.
We used Kung’s architectural balance concept to amortize
the energy cost of accessing the L1 SPM by tuning the
capacity of the highly efficient VRF (L0 memory) private
to each Spatz, quantitatively showing how vector processors
can not only alleviate the VNB on the instruction side of the
memory but also the memory bottleneck on the data side,
thanks to improved data reuse in their VRFs. We developed a
mathematical model to analyze the energy consumption of the
cluster when faced with target workloads and demonstrated its
use with a double-precision floating-point matrix multiplication
kernel as a function of the VRF (L0) size. A very small VRF
(L0) is needed to balance the L0 and L1 data access costs.
The Spatz-based cluster achieves high area and en-
ergy efficiency on compute-intensive workloads. Spatz
achieves an 7.7 FMA/cycle when running a 64 × 64 double-
precision floating-point matrix multiplication, correspond-
ing to 15.7 GFLOPSDP and 95.7 GFLOPSDP/W at 1 GHz
and nominal operating conditions (TT, 0.80 V, 25 °C), with
more than 55% of the power spent on the FPUs. Further-
more, the optimally-balanced Spatz-based cluster reaches a
95.0% FPU utilization (7.6 FMA/cycle), 15.2 GFLOPSDP, and
99.3 GFLOPSDP/W (61% of the power spent in the FPU) on
a 2D workload with a 7 × 7 kernel, resulting in an outstanding
area/energy efficiency of 171 GFLOPSDP/W/mm2
. At the same
area, a computing cluster built upon compact vector processors
reaches an energy efficiency 30% higher than that of a cluster
with the same FPU count built upon scalar RISC-V-based cores
specialized for stream-based floating-point computation.
This paper shows that vector processors are a sound approach
for building PE for shared-L1 clusters. The addition of a VRF
acting as L0 memory allows for a reduction in the bandwidth
requirement in the L1 interconnect when the VRF (L0) allows
for better data reuse, like in key kernels in AI such as matrix
multiplication. Given the slowdown of wiring and SRAM
technology scaling, this reduction simplifies the cluster’s low-
latency interconnect, the typical factor limiting the physical
implementation in current and future technologies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part through the TRISTAN
(#101095947) and the ISOLDE (#101112274) projects, both
funded through the Chips Joint Undertaking (CHIPS JU) of the
European Union’s Horizon Europe’s research and innovation
programme and its members.
Matteo Perotti received his M.Sc. degree in Elec-
tronic Engineering from the Polytechnic University
of Turin, Italy, in 2019. He is currently pursuing a
Ph.D. degree at the Integrated Systems Laboratory
of ETH Zurich, Switzerland. His research interests
include highly efficient computing architectures and
computation with high dynamic-range data types.
Samuel Riedel received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degree
in Electrical Engineering and Information Technology
at ETH Zurich in 2017 and 2019, respectively. He
is currently pursuing a Ph.D. degree with the Digital
Circuits and Systems group of ETH Zurich, under
the supervision of Prof. Luca Benini. His research
interests include computer architecture, focusing on
many-core systems and their programming model.
Matheus Cavalcante received his M.Sc. degree in
Integrated Electronic Systems from the Grenoble
Institute of Technology (Phelma) in 2018, and his
Ph.D. from ETH Zurich in 2023. During his Ph.D.
studies, Matheus worked with the Digital Circuits and
Systems Group under the supervision of Prof. Luca
Benini. Matheus’ research interests include vector
processing, large-scale high-performance computer
architectures, and emerging VLSI technologies.
14
Luca Benini holds the chair of Digital Circuits and
Systems at ETH Zurich and is a Full Professor at
the Università di Bologna. He received a Ph.D. from
Stanford University. He is a Fellow of the ACM
and a member of the Academia Europaea. He is
the recipient of the 2023 IEEE CS E. J. McCluskey
Award.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Naffziger, “Cross-disciplinary innovations required for the future
of computing,” 2021, 58th Design Automation Conference. [Online].
Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QlsXecH YsY
[2] J. Wuu, “Memory solutions for HPC & AI,” in Proceedings of the 2022
International Electron Devices Meeting. IEEE, 2022.
[3] GreenWaves Technologies Corp., GAP9 Datasheet, Grenoble, France,
2024, version 1.1. [Online]. Available: https://greenwaves-technologies.
com/wp-content/uploads/2024/07/gap9datasheet v1.1.pdf
[4] T. Adegbija, A. Rogacs, C. Patel, and A. Gordon-Ross, “Microprocessor
optimizations for the internet of things: A survey,” IEEE Transactions
on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 37,
no. 1, pp. 7–20, 2018.
[5] S. Pagani, P. D. S. Manoj, A. Jantsch, and J. Henkel, “Machine learning
for power, energy, and thermal management on multicore processors:
A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits and Systems, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 101–116, 2020.
[6] N. Verma, “Future prospects of in- and near-memory computing,” in
Proceedings of the 2022 International Electron Devices Meeting. IEEE,
2022.
[7] J. Backus, “Can programming be liberated from the von Neumann style?:
A functional style and its algebra of programs,” Commun. ACM, vol. 21,
no. 8, pp. 613–641, Aug. 1978.
[8] R. Brain, “Interconnect scaling: Challenges and opportunities,” in
Proceedings of the 2016 International Electron Devices Meeting. IEEE,
2016.
[9] RISC-V International, The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual: Unprivileged
ISA, CS Division, EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley,
CA, USA, Dec. 2019, version 20191213.
[10] P. Vizcaino et al., “Short reasons for long vectors in HPC CPUs: A
study based on RISC-V,” in Proceedings of the SC ’23 Workshops of
The International Conference on High Performance Computing, Network,
Storage, and Analysis. ACM, 2023.
[11] RISC-V Corp., “RISC-V ‘V’ Vector Extension, version 1.0,” 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/riscv/riscv-v-spec
[12] F. Zaruba, F. Schuiki, T. Hoefler, and L. Benini, “Snitch: A tiny pseudo
dual-issue processor for area and energy efficient execution of floating-
point intensive workloads,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 70,
no. 11, pp. 1845–1860, 2020.
[13] M. Cavalcante et al., “Spatz: A compact vector processing unit for high-
performance and energy-efficient shared-L1 clusters,” in Proceedings of
the 41st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design
(ICCAD ’22). ACM, 2022.
[14] F. Zaruba and L. Benini, “The cost of application-class processing: Energy
and performance analysis of a Linux-ready 1.7-GHz 64-Bit RISC-V core
in 22-nm FDSOI technology,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale
Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 2629–2640, 2019.
[15] F. Minervini et al., “Vitruvius+: An area-efficient RISC-V decoupled
vector coprocessor for high performance computing applications,” ACM
Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1–25, mar 2023.
[16] M. Perotti et al., “Ara2: Exploring single- and multi-core vector
processing with an efficient RVV 1.0 compliant open-source processor,”
IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 1822–1836, 2024.
[17] G. Paulin et al., “Soft tiles: Capturing physical implementation flexibility
for tightly-coupled parallel processing clusters,” in 2022 IEEE Computer
Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI). IEEE, 2022.
[18] N. Stephens et al., “The ARM scalable vector extension,” IEEE Micro,
vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 26–39, 2017.
[19] Nvidia H100 Tensor Core GPU Architecture, 1st ed., NVIDIA Corp.,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://resources.nvidia.com/en-us-tensor-core
[20] H. T. Kung, “Memory requirements for balanced computer architectures,”
SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News, vol. 14, no. 2, p. 49–54, May 1986.
[21] M. Scherer, G. Rutishauser, L. Cavigelli, and L. Benini, “CUTIE: Beyond
PetaOp/s/W ternary DNN inference acceleration with better-than-binary
energy efficiency,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of
Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1020–1033, 2022.
[22] A. Teman et al., “Power, area, and performance optimization of standard
cell memory arrays through controlled placement,” ACM Trans. Des.
Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1–25, may 2016.
[23] J. Shiomi, T. Ishihara, and H. Onodera, “Fully digital on-chip memory
using minimum height standard cells for near-threshold voltage com-
puting,” in 2016 26th International Workshop on Power and Timing
Modeling, Optimization and Simulation (PATMOS). IEEE, 2016.
[24] J. W. Choi, D. Bedard, R. Fowler, and R. Vuduc, “A roofline model of
energy,” in 2013 IEEE 27th International Symposium on Parallel and
Distributed Processing. IEEE, 2013.
[25] R.-J. Zhu et al., “Scalable MatMul-free language modeling,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.02528, 2024.
[26] K. Czechowski et al., “Balance principles for algorithm-architecture co-
design,” in Proc. of the 3rd USENIX Conf. on Hot Topic in Parallelism,
ser. HotPar’11. USENIX Association, 2011.
[27] G. Gobieski et al., “MANIC: A vector-dataflow architecture for ultra-low-
power embedded systems,” in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO ’52). ACM,
2019.
[28] OpenHW Group eXtension Interface, OpenHW Corp., Apr. 2022,
revision a3bcdd76. [Online]. Available: https://docs.openhwgroup.org/
projects/openhw-group-core-v-xif
[29] S. Mach, F. Schuiki, F. Zaruba, and L. Benini, “FPnew: An open-
source multiformat floating-point unit architecture for energy-proportional
transprecision computing,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale
Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 774–787, 2021.
[30] L. Bertaccini et al., “MiniFloat-NN and ExSdotp: An ISA extension
and a modular open hardware unit for low-precision training on RISC-V
cores,” in 2022 IEEE 29th Symposium on Computer Arithmetic (ARITH).
IEEE, 2022.
[31] S. Mittal, “A survey of techniques for architecting and managing GPU
register file,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems,
vol. 28, pp. 16–28, 2017.
[32] A. Garofalo et al., “A 1.15 TOPS/W, 16-cores parallel ultra-low power
cluster with 2b-to-32b fully flexible bit-precision and vector lockstep
execution mode,” in IEEE 47th European Solid State Circuits Conference
(ESSCIRC). IEEE, 2021.
[33] J. Reinders, “Intel AVX-512 instructions,” Intel Software Developer Zone,
Jun. 2017.
[34] Intel Corp., The Converged Vector ISA: Intel®
Advanced Vector Extensions
10, Santa Clara, CA, Jul. 2023, Revision 1.0.
[35] C. Kozyrakis and D. Patterson, “Overcoming the limitations of conven-
tional vector processors,” in 30th Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture, 2003. Proceedings. IEEE, 2003.
[36] Arm Corp., Introduction to Armv8.1-M architecture, Arm Corp., Cam-
bridge, UK, Feb. 2019, revision r1p1.
[37] SiFive Performance P270, SiFive Corp., San Mateo, CA, USA, 2022,
revision 21G3. [Online]. Available: https://sifive.cdn.prismic.io/sifive/
859c28c0-8bd5-4fc4-9113-a25a2a89bf9c P270+Data+Sheet.pdf
[38] SiFive, “P870 high-performance RISC-V processor,” in Hot Chips: A
Symposium on High-Perf. Chips. IEEE, Aug. 2023.
[39] SiFive Intelligence X280, SiFive Corp., San Mateo, CA, USA, 2022,
revision 21G3. [Online]. Available: https://sifive.cdn.prismic.io/sifive/
62e0df53-be02-4b50-b211-aa55b7042fc8 x280-datasheet-21G3.pdf
[40] R. M. Russell, “The CRAY-1 computer system,” Commun. ACM, vol. 21,
no. 1, pp. 63–72, Jan. 1978.
[41] T. Yoshida, “Fujitsu high performance CPU for the Post-K computer,”
in Hot Chips: A Symposium on High Performance Chips. IEEE, 2018.
[42] Green500, “Green500 list - November 2022,” Nov. 2022. [Online].
Available: https://www.top500.org/green500/lists/2022/11/
[43] Arm Cortex-M55 Processor Datasheet, Arm, Cambridge, UK, 2020.
[44] M. Platzer and P. Puschner, “Vicuna: A timing-predictable RISC-V
vector coprocessor for scalable parallel computation,” in 33rd Euromicro
Conference on Real-Time Systems (ECRTS 2021). Schloss Dagstuhl –
Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021.
[45] I. Al Assir, M. El Iskandarani, H. Al Sandid, and M. Saghir, “Arrow:
A RISC-V vector accelerator for machine learning inference,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.07169, 2021.
[46] M. Johns and T. J. Kazmierski, “A minimal RISC-V vector processor
for embedded systems,” in 2020 Forum for Specification and Design
Languages (FDL). IEEE, 2020.
15
[47] M. A. Islam and K. Kise, “Resource-efficient RISC-V vector extension
architecture for FPGA-based accelerators,” in Proceedings of the 13th
International Symposium on Highly Efficient Accelerators and Reconfig-
urable Technologies (HEART ’23). ACM, 2023.
