IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, MARCH 2023

1259

XNOR-Bitcount Operation Exploiting
Computing-In-Memory With STT-MRAMs
Ariana Musello , Member, IEEE, Esteban Garzón , Member, IEEE, Marco Lanuzza , Senior Member, IEEE,
Luis Miguel Prócel , Member, IEEE, and Ramiro Taco , Member, IEEE

Abstract—This brief presents an energy-efficient and highperformance XNOR-bitcount architecture exploiting the benefits
of computing-in-memory (CiM) and unique properties of spintransfer torque magnetic RAM (STT-MRAM) based on doublebarrier magnetic tunnel junctions (DMTJs). Our work proposes
hardware and algorithmic optimizations, benchmarked against
a state-of-the-art CiM-based XNOR-bitcount design. Simulation
results show that our hardware optimization reduces the storage requirement (–50%) for each XNOR-bitcount operation.
The proposed algorithmic optimization improves execution time
and energy consumption by about 30% (78%) and 26% (85%),
respectively, for single (5 sequential) 9-bit XNOR-bitcount operations. As a case study, our solution is demonstrated for shape
analysis using bit-quads.
Index Terms—Computing-in-memory, MAC, XNOR-bitcount,
BNN, CNN, spin-transfer torque, STT-MRAM, DMTJ, bit-quad.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ONVOLUTIONAL neural networks (CNN) are widely
used for image classification, object detection and recognition [1], [2], [3]. However, due to their computational
requirements and memory expensive structures, they cannot be
easily integrated in small, resource-limited devices, as required
in embedded and edge applications [1], [4], [5], [6]. Network
compression techniques have given rise to binarized neural
networks (BNNs), where weights and activations are represented by a single bit [4]. As a result, the generally expensive
multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations between weights and
activations can be reduced to low-complexity bitwise XNORbitcount operations. This makes BNNs power-efficient, computationally faster, and a memory-saving alternative to conventional CNNs [1]. To further optimize BNNs, we can consider
the computing-in-memory (CiM) approach, which exploits the
analog functionality and internal structure of the memory, as

C

Manuscript received 20 December 2022; accepted 23 January 2023. Date
of publication 31 January 2023; date of current version 6 March 2023. This
work was supported by the Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR)
under Project PRIN 2020LWPKH7. This brief was recommended by Associate
Editor A. L. Zimpeck. (Corresponding author: Esteban Garzón.)
Ariana Musello is with the Electronic Design Automation Group, Synopsys
Chile Ltda, Santiago de Chile 7630229, Chile (e-mail: amusellov@ieee.org).
Esteban Garzón and Marco Lanuzza are with the Department of
Computer Engineering, Modeling, Electronics and Systems, University of
Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy (e-mail: esteban.garzon@unical.it; m.lanuzza@
dimes.unical.it).
Luis Miguel Prócel and Ramiro Taco are with the Instituto de Micro y
Nanoelectrónica, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, 170901 Quito, Ecuador
(e-mail: lprocel@usfq.edu.ec; rtaco@usfq.edu.ec).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSII.2023.3241163.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2023.3241163

well as the peripheral circuitry, for data computation [7], [8].
Spin-transfer torque magnetic random-access memories (STTMRAMs) are leading candidates for CiM in edge devices,
due to their non-volatility, considerable write/read speed, compatibility with the CMOS manufacturing process, scalability,
and high endurance [9], [10], [11], [12]. Among the STTMRAM solutions, the double-barrier magnetic tunnel junction
(DMTJ) offers improved energy consumption thanks to the
reduced switching currents, as compared to the conventional
single-barrier MTJ (SMTJ) [13], [14].
This brief investigates hardware-level and algorithmic optimizations for the XNOR-bitcount (XNOR-BC) operation of
binary CNNs (BCNNs) using a CiM architecture with DMTJbased STT-MRAMs. Our approach relies on the XNOR-BC
method proposed in [15], which is used here as baseline for
comparison.
To summarize, the main contributions of this brief are:
• An optimized energy-efficient and high-performance
XNOR-BC algorithm, using a DMTJ-based STT-MRAM
hardware solution.
• The proposed optimization of the memory array structure allows reducing (–50%) the storage requirement for
computing the XNOR-BC operation.
• The proposed algorithmic optimization enables execution
time and energy savings of ∼30% (∼80%) for single
(5 sequential) XNOR-BCs.
• Both circuit and functional assessments are carried out by
applying the proposed architecture to bit-quad matching
in binary images for shape analysis [16].
The remainder of this brief is organized as follows.
Section II introduces the DMTJ and the adopted STT-MRAM
bitcell configuration. Section III describes the XNOR-BC
method, and presents the proposed hardware-level and algorithmic optimizations of this brief. Section IV presents the
design and evaluation. An application for shape analysis is
shown in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes our work.

II. D OUBLE -BARRIER M AGNETIC T UNNEL J UNCTION
(DMTJ) & STT-MRAM B ITCELL
The core device of a MRAM architecture is the MTJ [10],
whose most common representative is the SMTJ. It consists
of two ferromagnetic layers, namely reference and free layer
(RL and FL), separated by a thin oxide barrier. The magnetic orientations of the RL and FL can be either parallel
(low resistance state or ‘0’) or anti-parallel (high resistance
state or ‘1’) [13]. To switch between the MTJ states, the

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

1260

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, MARCH 2023

STT-MRAM bitcell (2T1DMTJ-SC) with write/read operations.

STT switching mechanism [13] is exploited, which is triggered by applying a directional current (IWRITE ) greater than
the critical switching current (Ic0 ). Unfortunately, the conventional SMTJ suffers from considerable large switching current,
which adversely impacts on both energy consumption and area
occupation. One promising solution concerns the use of the
DMTJ [14]. The DMTJ has an additional RL that enhances
the total torque acting on the FL, allowing reduced switching
current as compared to the SMTJ [13].
Fig. 1 shows the MRAM bitcell configuration used in this
brief: two-transistor-one-DMTJ in standard connection, i.e.,
2T1DMTJ-SC. According to our previous studies [13], this is
the most write-energy efficient DMTJ-based bitcell configuration. Fig. 1 also illustrates the write (a) and read (b) operations.
Activation of the access transistors (ATs) through the wordlines (WLs) controls the flow of the current IWRITE ; its
direction, dependent on the bitline (BL) and sourceline (SL)
voltages, defines what state is written into the DMTJ. As for
the read operation, we exploit a current sensing scheme: a constant read voltage VREAD is applied to the SL while the ATs
are turned on. The resulting current IREAD in the BL is compared to a reference Iref by a transimpedance sense amplifier
(SA) to determine the stored bit [17].
A macrospin-based Verilog-A compact model [14] describes
the DMTJ device, whose physical parameters are reported
in [13], [14]. The DMTJ features a diameter of 32 nm, high
(low) resistance state of 15.3 k (6.9 k), and critical switching current (Ic0 ) of 14.1 µA. For the access transistors, a
commercial 65 nm CMOS technology was considered.
III. XNOR-B ITCOUNT M ETHODS BASED ON C I M
The MAC is the main forward propagation operation of
any neural network: weights and activations are multiplied
element-wise and then the results are added [4]. In CNNs, each
filter (k × k weight 2D matrix) is convolved with each feature
map (input activation 2D matrix). The filter slides throughout the feature map, performing MAC operations between its
coefficients and k × k portions of the feature map [4]. BCNNs
are based on binarized weights and activations, i.e., data can
be ‘−1’ (represented by logic ‘0’) or ‘+1’ (represented by
logic ‘1’) [4]. Therefore, the MAC operation can be simplified to a bitwise XNOR-BC operation [15]: multiple XNORs
between weights and activations, followed by a “bitcount” of
those results. The XNOR-BC result is the amount of XNOR
‘1’s minus ‘0’s, and once binarized using the sign activation
function it is equal to the XNOR results’ majority [4].

Fig. 2. Hardware structure proposed in (a) [15], and (b) this brief (optimized)
using DMTJ-based STT-MRAM bitcells for a XNOR operation.

A. XNOR-BC Method Proposed in [15] Exploiting
DMTJ-Based STT-MRAMs
Wang et al.’s XNOR-BC method [15] exploits the write
and read operations of voltage-controlled spin-orbit torque
(VC-SOT) based MRAM to perform multiple Boolean operations in parallel. We implemented this method using twoterminal STT-DMTJs (instead of three-terminal SOT devices)
with the main purpose of reducing circuit complexity. The
implementation with STT-MRAM simply requires an adaptation of its write/read operations, utilizing the polarization
of the BL/SL and the activation of the access transistors that
allow the current to flow. The single-bit XNOR process uses
two complementary bitcells, DMTJ1 and DMTJ1 . This structure, adapted to STT-DMTJs, is shown in Fig. 2(a). XNOR is
calculated as follows: XOR → A ⊕ W = A · W + A · W,
where A and W are the binary input activation and filter
weight, respectively [15]. The desired complement (XNOR)
is obtained through the inverted output of the SA. For a single
STT-MRAM based XNOR operation, the basic steps are as
follows [15]:
1) Write weights: Write filter weights W and W to DMTJ1
and DMTJ1 , respectively, in two cycles (for DMTJ1 , 1st
write ‘0’s and 2nd write ‘1’s; inversely for DMTJ1 ).
2) AND operation: Apply input activations A and A to the
WLs for DMTJ1 and DMTJ1 , respectively, and attempt
to write ‘0’ to both bitcells. This stores A·W in DMTJ1 ,
and A · W in DMTJ1 .
3) OR operation: Read both bitcells simultaneously; the
accumulated sensing current in the connected BLs represents A · W + A · W, i.e., the XOR result.

MUSELLO et al.: XNOR-BITCOUNT OPERATION EXPLOITING CiM WITH STT-MRAMs

Fig. 3. Proposed single XNOR operation exploiting STT-DMTJs and the
optimized array structure.

To perform the multi-bit XNOR-BC operation between a
k×k filter and a k×k feature map portion (N weights and input
activations), the corresponding N XOR operations can be computed in parallel and the concept of ‘analog majority’ (AM)
can be used [15]. In Step-3, all the bitcells are read simultaneously, so the accumulated current IN-XORs in the connected
BLs represents the addition of the N XOR results. IN-XORs is
compared to a properly set reference current Iref(N) in the SA,
such that the XOR results’ majority is detected and the SA
outputs the binarized XOR-BC/XNOR-BC result (OR+AM
operation). If the majority of XOR results are ‘1’(‘0’), then
IN-XORs < (>) Iref(N) , so the binarized XOR-BC result given
by the SA is ‘1’(‘0’), and XNOR-BC is ‘0’(‘1’).

1261

1) Write weights: In two cycles, write filter weight W
into DMTJ1 , and W into DMTJ1 (1st write ‘0’ to both
DMTJs; 2nd apply W and W to WLs of DMTJ1 and
DMTJ1 , respectively, and attempt to write ‘1’ to both).
See Fig. 3, Step-1.
2) AND+OR operation: Apply input activations A and A
to the WLs of DMTJ1 and DMTJ1 , respectively, and
attempt to read both bitcells simultaneously. See Fig. 3,
Step-2.
Only one bitcell is really read because of the complementary
activations used. The sensing current - or lack thereof - of
DMTJ1 (DMTJ1 ) represents A · W (A · W). The OR operation
occurs because of the shared BL, and the resulting current in
it represents the XNOR result A · W + A · W.
As for the multi-bit XNOR-BC operation, the same parallel XNOR computations and ‘analog majority’ concept (BC
portion of the operation) are used. When Step-2 is simultaneously performed, the accumulated current IN-XNORs in the BL
is compared to Iref(N) in the SA, and the binarized XNOR-BC
result is obtained (operation AND+OR+AM).
The advantages of the optimized XNOR-BC method are
as follows. (a) Only two write operations are needed instead
of three (energy/time savings). (b) The weights stored in the
bitcells are not overwritten during the process. Therefore, if
consecutive XNOR-BC operations are performed using the
same filter (weights) with different feature map portions (activations), i.e., cross-correlation, weight-writing is done just
once at the beginning, and the following XNOR-BCs consist
of AND+OR+AM steps only. (c) During the reading step,
only half of the bitcells are activated instead of all of them.
This means less accumulated read current and reduced energy
consumption. (d) The direct result of the SA is XNOR-BC,
instead of XOR-BC.

B. Hardware-Level Optimization
In the design presented in [15], each bitcell of the complementary pair requires a different BL, and the WL is not shared
(see Fig. 2(a)). Therefore, a single XNOR operation demands
for 2 BLs and 2 WLs of the memory array; N parallel XNOR
operations require 2 BLs and 2×N WLs. Moreover, a connection between the separate BLs to a single SA is needed. Our
hardware-level optimization consists of locating each pair of
complementary bitcells on the same BL, as shown in Fig. 2(b).
As for storage density, since the complementary bitcell strips
are now on the same BL, N parallel XNOR operations require
just one BL and 2×N WLs.

IV. STT-MRAM D ESIGN AND XNOR-BC S IMULATIONS
A. STT-MRAM Bitcell Design
The STT-MRAM design features a low supply voltage of
0.8 V. The write current is set to ensure a write-error-rate
(WER) of 10−7 [13]. For the read operation, read disturbance failures (accidental switching of the DMTJ states [17]),
and read decision failures (incorrect reading of the DMTJ
states [18]) should be avoided. For this, a VREAD that ensures
IREAD(0/1) < IREADmax = 9.987 µA must be used, considering
a read disturbance rate RDR = 10−9 , and a read pulse width
tREAD =1 ns. Based on this information, and trade-offs between
area, delay, energy and robustness, the access transistor widths
and cell write/read characteristics are: wn = wp = 310 nm,
IWRITE /Ic0 ≈ 2.6, and VREAD = 95 mV. Table I reports bitcelllevel nominal results, from which we take a 3 (1) ns long write
(read) pulse for the remainder of this brief.

C. Algorithmic Optimization
Step-2 (AND operation) and Step-3 (OR operation) of the
single XNOR method in [15] can be merged together into a
single read step based on the input activations. We consider
the following expression: XNOR → A ⊕ W = A · W + A · W.
This methodology allows the direct computation of the XNOR
result, instead of the XOR. The basic steps of the optimized
method are as follows:

B. Implementation of XNOR-BC Methods and Simulations
Synopsys’ Custom Compiler is used to build the hardware
and simulate the XNOR-BC methods proposed in [15] and this
brief, both implemented with DMTJ-based STT-MRAMs. The
memory array with the optimized structure for a M-filter N-bit
parallel computation is shown in Fig. 4. The digital control
circuitry was behaviorally simulated for both implementations

1262

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, MARCH 2023

TABLE I
B ITCELL -L EVEL R ESULTS : W RITE AND R EAD O PERATIONS

TABLE II
E VALUATION OF M ULTI -F ILTER XNOR-BC I MPLEMENTATIONS

Fig. 5.
Simulation waveforms of the 3-filter 9-bit parallel XNOR-BC
operations in Table II using this brief’s proposed method.
TABLE III
E XECUTION T IME AND W ORST-C ASE E NERGY FOR S INGLE 9-B IT
XNOR-BC O PERATION

Fig. 4.

Memory array for M-filter N-bit parallel XNOR-BC computations.

(i.e., our and the reference one) to verify the whole functionality. Performance results reported hereafter do not take into
account the electrical effect of the digital control.
The functional evaluation for multi-filter operations is simulated using the same three 9-bit XNOR-BC operations
(M = 3 and N = 9) reported in [15]: three 3 × 3 filters and a single 3 × 3 feature map portion (see Table II,
Filter and Activations columns). Table II shows the measured accumulated read current I9-XORs and I9-XNORs for the
method in [15] and this brief, respectively. Each result is
equal to the expected current value according to the number of ‘1’ XNOR results, P, in the XNOR-BC operation:
I9-XORs = (18 − (9 − P)) · IREAD(0) + (9 − P) · IREAD(1) and
I9-XNORs = (9 − P) · IREAD(0) + P · IREAD(1) . This verifies that
the implementations output the correct results, exhibiting high
parallelism and throughput. The simulation waveforms for this
example are reported in Fig. 5.
For a single 9-bit XNOR-BC operation (one 3 × 3 filter),
Table III compares our proposal and its baseline in terms of
execution time and worst-case energy consumption. As the

bitcells are not overwritten with ‘0’ during AND operation and
only half of them are read, our design exhibits reduced energy
consumption (−26.4%) and less execution time (–30%).
Further improvements can be obtained when multiple consecutive XNOR-BCs are performed between the same 3 × 3
filter (hardware-wise, the same pair of complementary 9-bitcell
strips) and multiple 3×3 portions of a feature map. Take 5 consecutive XNOR-BC operations: with the method in [15], each
XNOR-BC costs 3686.3 fJ and 10 ns, with a total of 18431.5 fJ
and 50 ns for the five; with the proposed method, the first
XNOR-BC costs 2713.9 fJ and 7 ns, but the following four
only cost 6.7 fJ and 1 ns, with a total of 2740.7 fJ and 11 ns.
This implies a reduction of about 85.1% to the total energy
consumption, and of 78% in terms of execution time.
V. A PPLICATION : B IT-Q UADS FOR S HAPE A NALYSIS
Bit-quads are 2 × 2 binary patterns that can be used to
compute the area, perimeter, and Euler number of a binary
image by counting the number of matches (n{Qx }) between
them and portions of such an image [16]. For example, the
Euler number under four-connectivity can be calculated with
E = 0.25[n{Q1 } − n{Q3} + 2 · n{QD }].
Our proposed architecture and method can be used to find
the bit-quad patterns in an image by performing parallel crosscorrelations between each bit-quad (16 in total) and the image.
Thus, multiple consecutive 4-bit XNOR-BC operations are
performed between each bit-quad - the filter whose weights
are stored in the DMTJs - and each 2 × 2 section of the image
- whose pixels are the input activations of the AND+OR+AM
step. We determine a match through the BL sensed current:
if I4-XNORs = 4 × IREAD(1) = 18.40 µA < Iref(4) , it means the
4 XNOR results of the XNOR-BC operation are 1, so the 4
pixels of the bit-quad and the image section are equal. Thus,
the binarized XNOR-BC result of the SA is 1. For this, the
array in Fig. 4 is used with M = 16 and N = 4.
This is illustrated by the example reported in Fig. 6, where
the 16 bit-quads (divided in categories) are shown to the left,
and some of the 25 2×2 portions of the 6×6 binary image inset
are shown at the top. Fig. 6 shows the I4-XNORs waveforms for
the AND+OR+AM steps, and highlights them when equal
to 18.40 µA, which corresponds to the coincidences between
bit-quad and image portion (see match pattern in Fig. 6). This

MUSELLO et al.: XNOR-BITCOUNT OPERATION EXPLOITING CiM WITH STT-MRAMs

1263

single filter, our method achieved a 78% decrease in execution time and a 85.1% reduction in energy consumption. The
optimized architecture was also demonstrated to be a timeand energy-efficient tool in the field of shape analysis, particularly for the process of bit-quad matching in binary images for
later topological analysis. Future research efforts will involve
the demonstration of a complete neural network using the
proposed architecture.
R EFERENCES

Fig. 6.

I4-XNORs waveforms and bit-quad matching results.

proves that the proposed approach works correctly for bit-quad
matching. With the matches counted and stored, the image’s
Euler number can be calculated as E = 0.25[6−4+2(1)] = 1.
For the above example, execution time was 76 ns: 51 ns
for Step-1 (write weights) and 25 ns for consecutive Steps-2
(AND+OR+AM). The worst-case energy consumption for a
single bit-quad is about 1.28 pJ. If the method in [15] was
used, total execution time would be 25 × 55 ns = 1375 ns,
with worst-case bit-quad energy consumption of 40.96 pJ. This
would be ∼ 18× and ∼ 32×, respectively, as compared to our
approach.

VI. C ONCLUSION
In this brief, we propose a XNOR-BC architecture using
computing-in-memory along with DMTJ-based STT-MRAMs.
The XNOR-BC was optimized from a state-of-the-art
approach, which was used as baseline to evaluate the cost
at hardware- and algorithm-level. Such a benchmark analysis
has been carried out by performing circuit-level simulations
with Synopsys’ Custom Compiler tool. The hardware-level
optimization of the memory array structure halved the storage requirements needed to compute the XNOR-BC operation while simplifying BL connections. For a single 9-bit
XNOR-BC operation (one 3 × 3 filter), our optimized method
allowed 30% less execution time and energy savings of 26.4%.
Considering 5 sequential 9-bit XNOR-BC operations with a

[1] H. Qin, R. Gong, X. Liu, X. Bai, J. Song, and N. Sebe, “Binary
neural networks: A survey,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 105, Sep. 2020,
Art. no. 107281.
[2] K. Kang et al., “T-CNN: Tubelets with convolutional neural networks for
object detection from videos,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 2896–2907, Oct. 2018.
[3] Z. Chen, Y. Ma, and Z. Wang, “Hybrid stochastic-binary computing
for low-latency and high-precision inference of CNNs,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 2707–2720, Jul. 2022.
[4] X. Si et al., “A dual-split 6T SRAM-based computing-in-memory unitmacro with fully parallel product-sum operation for binarized DNN edge
processors,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 66, no. 11,
pp. 4172–4185, Nov. 2019.
[5] M. Rastegari, V. Ordonez, J. Redmon, and A. Farhadi, “XNOR-Net:
ImageNet classification using binary convolutional neural networks,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2016, pp. 525–542.
[6] M. Yayla et al., “FeFET-based binarized neural networks under
temperature-dependent bit errors,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 71, no. 7,
pp. 1681–1695, Jul. 2022.
[7] G. Santoro, G. Turvani, and M. Graziano, “New logic-in-memory
paradigms: An architectural and technological perspective,”
Micromachines, vol. 10, no. 6, p. 368, 2019.
[8] E. Garzón, A. Teman, M. Lanuzza, and L. Yavits, “AIDA: Associative
in-memory deep learning accelerator,” IEEE Micro, vol. 42, no. 6,
pp. 67–75, Nov./Dec. 2022.
[9] H. Cai et al., “Proposal of analog in-memory computing with magnified tunnel magnetoresistance ratio and universal STT-MRAM cell,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 1519–1531,
Apr. 2022.
[10] P. Barla, V. K. Joshi, and S. Bhat, “Spintronic devices: A promising
alternative to CMOS devices,” J. Comput. Electron., vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 805–837, 2021.
[11] K. Asifuzzaman, R. S. Verdejo, and P. Radojković, “Enabling a reliable
STT-MRAM main memory simulation,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Memory
Syst., 2017, pp. 283–292.
[12] F. Cutugno, E. Garzón, R. De Rose, G. Finocchio, M. Lanuzza, and
M. Carpentieri, “Field-free magnetic tunnel junction for logic operations
based on voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy,” IEEE Magn. Lett.,
vol. 12, pp. 1–4, 2021.
[13] E. Garzón et al., “Assessment of STT-MRAMs based on double-barrier
MTJs for cache applications by means of a device-to-system level
simulation framework,” Integration, vol. 71, pp. 56–69, Mar. 2020.
[14] R. De Rose, M. d’Aquino, G. Finocchio, F. Crupi, M. Carpentieri, and
M. Lanuzza, “Compact modeling of perpendicular STT-MTJs with double reference layers,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., vol. 18, pp. 1063–1070,
2019.
[15] H. Wang, W. Kang, B. Pan, H. Zhang, E. Deng, and W. Zhao, “Spintronic
computing-in-memory architecture based on voltage-controlled spin–
orbit torque devices for binary neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 4944–4950, Oct. 2021.
[16] W. Pratt, Digital Image Processing, 4th ed. New York, NY, USA: JWS,
2007.
[17] A. Khvalkovskiy et al., “Basic principles of STT-MRAM cell operation in memory arrays,” J. Phys. D Appl. Phys., vol. 46, no. 7, 2013,
Art. no. 074001.
[18] R. Bishnoi, M. Ebrahimi, F. Oboril, and M. B. Tahoori, “Read disturb
fault detection in STT-MRAM,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Test Conf., 2014,
pp. 1–7.

Open Access funding provided by ‘Università della Calabria’ within the CRUI CARE Agreement

