IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 3, MARCH 2025 989
Modeling and Predicting Noise-Induced Failure
Rates in Ultra-Low-Voltage SRAM Bitcells
Affected by Process Variations
Léopold Van Brandt , Michele Bonnin , Mauricio Banaszeski da Silva , Member, IEEE, Pascal Bolcato,
Gilson I. Wirth , Senior Member, IEEE, Denis Flandre , Senior Member, IEEE, and Jean-Charles Delvenne
Abstract— Stability of ultra-low-voltage SRAM bitcells in
retention mode is threatened by two types of uncertainty: process
variability and intrinsic noise. While variability dominates the
failure probability, noise-induced bit flips in weakened bitcells
lead to dynamic instability. We study both effects jointly in a
unified SPICE simulation framework. Starting from a synthetic
representation of process variations introduced in a previous
work, we identify the cases of poor noise immunity that require
thorough noise analyses. Relying on a rigorous and systematic
methodology, we simulate them in the time domain so as to
emulate a true data retention operation. Short times to failure,
unacceptable for a practical ultra-low-power memory system
application, are recorded. The transient bit-flip mechanism is
analyzed and a dynamic failure criterion involving the unstable
steady state is established. We conclude that, beyond static
variability, the dynamic noise inflates defectiveness among SRAM
bitcells. Then, a stochastic nonlinear model, fully characterizable
from conventional deterministic SPICE simulations, is presented.
We then leverage it to efficiently and accurately predict the
mean time to failure with an analytical Eyring-Kramers formula,
recently extended to account for the varying-noise behavior of
nonlinear systems.
Index Terms— Ultra-low-voltage SRAM, noise-induced fail-
ures, SRAM dynamic stability, stochastic modeling.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE need for ultra-low-power (ULP) circuits and systems
is notably motivated by the massive deployment of con-
nected autonomous IoT nodes [1], translating into ultra-low
voltage (ULV) design [2]. Processors operating at a supply
Received 23 June 2024; revised 24 October 2024; accepted 17 December
2024. Date of publication 10 January 2025; date of current version 27 February
2025. This work was supported in part by the Research Project “Thermo-
dynamics of Circuits for Computation” of the National Fund for Scientific
Research (FNRS) of Belgium. This article was recommended by Associate
Editor L. Trojman. (Corresponding author: Léopold Van Brandt.)
Léopold Van Brandt, Denis Flandre, and Jean-Charles Delvenne are
with the Institute for Information and Communication Technologies, Elec-
tronics and Applied Mathematics (ICTEAM), Université catholique de
Louvain (UCLouvain), 1340 Ottignies-Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium (e-mail:
leopold.vanbrandt@uclouvain.be).
Michele Bonnin is with the Department of Electronics and Telecommuni-
cations, Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Turin, Italy.
Mauricio Banaszeski da Silva is with the Department of Electronics and
Computing, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria 97105-900,
Brazil.
Pascal Bolcato is with Siemens DISW-ICS-CICV, 38240 Meylan, France.
Gilson I. Wirth is with the Electrical Engineering Department, Universidade
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 90040-060 Porto Alegre, Brazil.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2024.3525387
Fig. 1. 6T SRAM bitcell. Data retention is ensured by the cross-coupled
inverter pair (M1 and M2, M3 and M4), like in 8T and 10T architectures.
voltage (VDD) lowered below 200 mV are demonstrated [3].
Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) arrays are essential
blocks of ULP systems [2], typically ranging from a few
kB [2], [3] to 32 kB = 262 144 bits [4]. The functionality
of these bitcells must be statistically guaranteed and thereby
predicted.
Whereas the MOS transistors of smallest gate length offer
higher-density SRAM arrays and faster read/write operations,
they are also more sensitive to uncertainties like process
variability and intrinsic noise. The effect of process varia-
tions is twofold. On one hand, a small yet non-negligible
fraction (e.g. that must be guaranteed below ∼ 100 ppm for
the above mentioned SRAM array sizes [5]) of bitcells are
defective as fabricated [6]. On the other hand, some surviving
bitcells severely affected by variability have reduced noise
immunity and are thereby prone to dynamic instability [7],
[8], [9]. Although these are deemed functional at time zero,
the intrinsic noise is likely to induce failures during retention
or bit flips in short times unacceptable for data retention in
practical applications [7], [8], [9].
Generally, robustness of SRAM bitcells against all
read/write/hold failures due to the combined effects of process
variations and noise is a major concern for ULV design [2],
[10]. To alleviate the tradeoff and to overcome the limitations
of the Six-Transistor (6T) SRAM bitcell (sketched at the
transistor level in Figure 1) dedicated ULV architectures like
the 8T [11] and the 10T [12], [13], [14], [15] are provided with
a read buffer. In this configuration, the hold mode becomes the
critical one. For all these bitcells, data retention is ensured by
a cross-coupled inverter pair (latch, dotted box in Figure 1)
1549-8328 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
990 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 3, MARCH 2025
[14, Fig. 1], which implements a feedback loop counteracting
moderate disturbances, thereby ensuring a certain stability and
noise immunity.
One can find a many ULP applications, especially biomed-
ical [16], [17], for which the activity factor of the SRAM is
low so that the typical retention time is long. This makes the
retention mode all the more critical in terms of energy minimi-
sation and dynamic stability. From a power-aware design point
of view, the key issue is to further reduce VDD in retention
(lower than for the read/write operations [16], [17]), while
maintaining the cell failure probability below an acceptable
value.
Simulating failures in retention, i.e. bit flips induced by
the intrinsic noise of the transistors, requires computational
intensive transient noise analyses [7], [8], [9], [18]. Those are
conventional time-domain simulations however with indepen-
dent random current noise sources added in parallel to each
dissipative devices (resistors, MOS transistors,. . . ). A robust
methodology, compatible with industrial tools, was described
in [7]. Whereas transient noise simulations are suitable and
insightful (as emulating real-world conditions) for nonlinear
circuits operating in out-of-equilibrium, large-signal condi-
tions such as SRAM bitcells on the verge of instability, the
CPU time quickly explodes with the number of cases (e.g.
process variations) [7], [8], [9]. The brute-force approach that
couples Monte-Carlo simulations with transient noise analyses
is therefore prohibitively expensive. This has motivated former
attempts of faster prediction methods. The authors of [18] and
[19] developed an accelerated simulator aimed at efficiently
estimating the mean time to failure (MT T F) in CMOS
latches though not straightforward to extend to other memory
architectures and technologies. We also find a few analytical
attempts in the literature. The framework proposed in [20]
and [21], based on Markov chains and queue theory, suffers
from the same limitations as [18] and [19] and lacks validation
with SPICE transient noise simulations. In [22], the MT T F
is calculated from stochastic thermodynamic considerations,
however assuming simplified transistor model and constant
capacitances. We owe the only existing closed-form formula
in the electronics literature to Kish [23], with preliminary
attempts of application reported in [8] and [24]. The previous
works [8], [9], [25] have nevertheless shown by numerical
experiments that Kish’s and the similar but more rigorous
Nobile’s formulas [26] lack accuracy. Both indeed rely on a
coarse near-steady-state approximation around the presumed
stable point of the bitcell in retention, which is highly inappro-
priate in describing the stochastic nonlinear dynamics of the
SRAM [25] as will be further revisited in the present paper.
Very recently, an extended Eyring-Kramers formula has
been derived from stochastic calculus [25]. Relying on a unidi-
mensional stochastic model fully characterizable with SPICE
simulations [9], it does account for both the nonlinear SRAM
dynamics and the varying noise intensity along the bit-flip
trajectory. Remarkable in terms of accuracy, the formula aims
at predicting the mean transition time in a wide and general
class of autonomous nonlinear bistable systems, in particular
the MT T F in SRAM bitcell in retention. Combined with
the process variability-aware framework introduced in [8],
we believe that such a semi-analytical approach is a promising
avenue for efficient SPICE-compliant reliability assessment.
Extending the proceedings [8], [9], we thus propose a
methodology for fast and accurate prediction of the MT T F
in ULV SRAM bitcells in retention, in presence of both
process variations and intrinsic noise. The rest of this paper
is structured as follows. Section II present the process
variability-aware simulation framework of [8] in order to
insightfully identify the worst-cases of endangered function-
ality. Transient noise simulations is then the purpose of
Section III. Starting from the observation, the bit-flip mech-
anism is extensively explained in Section III-A. The choice
of the simulation parameters and the related CPU time are
addressed in Section III-B. In Section III-C, we analyse and
model the T T F distribution to show that, in agreement with
the general theory of Markovian bistable system, the MT T F
metric alone fully parametrises it and hence is relevant in
quantifying the SRAM dynamic stability. Stochastic model-
ing is extensively developed in Section IV, first generally
(Section IV-A) and then formally reduced to unidimensional
dynamics (Section IV-B) as conjectured in [9]. We place
particular emphasis on the characterisation from conventional
deterministic SPICE simulations, compatible with industrial
transistor compact models and advanced technologies. Sub-
sequently, approximate closed-form formulas to predict the
MT T F, valid when the thermal noise is dominant, are
summarised in Section V. Their accuracies are discussed
in Section VI, dedicated to the results. Section VII finally
draws the conclusions and opens perspectives regarding the
future incorporation of the low-frequency noise, in addition to
process variations and thermal noise.
II. PROCESS VARIABILITY-AWARE
SIMULATION FRAMEWORK
The voltage limit in ULV circuits is mainly dictated by
process variations [2, Fig. 17]. As extensively reviewed in [6],
enhanced Monte Carlo methods rely on the most recent
advances in importance sampling to speed up the simulations
whose aim is to empirically estimate the SRAM failure
probability. The intrinsic noise of the transistors (including
the access transistors M5 and M6 shown Figure 1) and of
peripheral circuits comes as an additional uncertainty, taking
on the design margins. The same goes for the supply-voltage
(droop) noise. The VDD referred to as below may therefore be
thought as the minimal supply voltage, reduced compared to
its nominal value.
In [6], a novel non-Monte-Carlo semi-analytical method-
ology was introduced the detect the hold failures caused by
static variability within ULV SRAM bitcells. It was shown
that the dominant effect of process variations affecting the
MOS transistors can be suitably and accurately modelled by
two series-voltage sources δV1 and δV2, each applied at the
input of one inverter of the latch [6, Figure 4]. The noise
margin of a CMOS inverter operating in subthreshold is indeed
dominantly degraded by the imbalance between nMOS and
pMOS transistors [2], [27]. These δV may notably be related
to the individual Vth shifts and the same goes for their statis-
tics [6]. This is why we understand these sources of variations
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
VAN BRANDT et al.: MODELING AND PREDICTING NOISE-INDUCED FAILURE RATES IN ULV SRAM BITCELLS 991
as “intrinsic” to the physical inverters: for instance, “Inverter
1” refers to a nominal inverter affected by δV1 (see dashed
box in Figure 2(a)) throughout the text. Their effect is incor-
porated in the modified voltage transfer characteristics (VTCs),
shifted from the nominal VTCs (in green in Figure 2(c)).
The double DC sweep of the variations (δV1, δV2) yields the
two-dimensional (2D) representation of Figure 2(b). To each
(δV1, δV2) point is thoughtfully associated an SRAM bitcell,
whose functionality has been assessed with the traditional
“butterfly plot” [28] (Figure 2(c)). A tested bitcell is functional
(green and orange), at time zero, if the number of cross
points is exactly equal to three; defective (red) otherwise. The
(positive) static noise margin (SN M) of the functional bitcells
can be extracted with the SPICE-compliant method from List
and Seevinck [28]. The procedure is graphically illustrated for
three special cases of variations in Figure 2(c): nominal bitcell
(SN M = 61 mV, comfortably stable), δV1 = −δV2 = 55 mV
(SN M = 5 mV, barely functional), 65 mV (defective).
Whereas any SRAM bitcell exhibiting a non-negative noise
margin (SN M ≥ 0) would be classified as functional based
on purely static considerations, we expect those with lowest
SN M to have poor noise immunity and to be dynamically
unstable. Rigorously, the SN M only quantifies the robustness
of a bitcell against DC sources of variations, in a particular sce-
nario where both inverters are adversely affected [6] (dashed
line δV1 = −δV2). The dynamic noise margin, i.e. the robust-
ness of the bitcell against transient noise, is substantially larger
than the SN M as a consequence of the non-zero response time
of the inverter gates (low-pass filtering effect) [7], [29]. The
SN M nevertheless remains an indicative metric of low noise
immunity and we can identify cells to be treated in priority
for noise analysis.
In Figure 2(b), we have highlighted in orange the region
corresponding to bitcells whose SN M lies between 0 (verge
of instability, corresponding to the failure boundary shown in
black dots) and 10 mV. Crucially, short T T F [18], [24] are
likely observed for the bitcells in the orange crown, possibly
shorter than the typical retention time of the memory appli-
cation and hence unacceptable. The intrinsic noise therefore
inflates the cell failure probability, in addition to variability,
and one wants to assess its contribution through the probability
P(T T F < retention time | SN M ≥ 0). (1)
whereas the inner boundary of the orange crown of Figure 2(b)
is firstly guessed by SN M ≤ 10 mV, an iterative proce-
dure would ultimately compare the obtained T T F to the
retention time to enlarge the statistically relevant area. The
whole area should be covered for a sound calculation of (1)
in a longer-term reliability perspective. The naive approach
would rely on repeated trials of transient noise simulations,
in a Monte-Carlo fashion. As will be evidenced in the next
Section III, this route is totally unaffordable without acceler-
ated framework.
III. TRANSIENT NOISE SIMULATIONS
Simulating the noise in the time domain requires to: (i) add
individual physical noise sources in parallel with each device
Fig. 2. (a) SRAM bitcell in retention mode, with process variations
modelled as series-voltage sources applied at the inputs of the two inverters
(M1 and M2, M3 and M4 in Figure 1). (b) 2D representation of functional
(green and orange) and defective (red) SRAM bitcells in presence of process
variability, deterministically simulated with a double DC sweep of variations
(δV1, δV2). The orange crown contains the bitcells of positive but low
SN M (≤ 10 mV). Voltage step of the double DC sweep : 1δV = 1 mV.
(c) Butterfly plots of three special cases marked by dots in (b), along the line
δV1 = −δV2 corresponding to the worse-case scenario where both inverters
are adversely affected. For functional bitcells, the SN M is the width of
the largest inscribed square. Illustrated case: 28 nm FD-SOI Single-P-Well
(SPW) SRAM cell (inverters made of RVT nMOS and LVT pMOS; RVT
nMOS access transistors) of minimal transistor dimensions Ln = Lp = 30 nm
and Wn = Wp = 80 nm, SPW bias VB = 0, operating at VDD = 200 mV and
T = 300 K.
(e.g. transistor); (ii) generate random values at each time step;
(iii) perform conventional transient simulations [7].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
992 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 3, MARCH 2025
While insightful and accurate as emulating real-world large-
signal conditions for arbitrary nonlinear circuits [30], transient
noise analyses are rarely encountered in the literature. The first
reason is, undoubtedly, the high computation time, difficult
to fit in a design schedule; the second is, possibly, a lack
of understanding of the specific simulation parameters. These
points will be addressed in Section III-B.
The concern is further reinforced by an additional challenge:
the incorporation of process variability in noise analyses,
or conversely. The rarity of the failure events makes the
brute-force approach coupling Monte-Carlo simulations with
transient noise simulations even more prohibitively expensive.
Previous work [7] mainly focused on symmetrical latches
(neglecting access transistors M5 and M6 in Figure 1) operat-
ing at extremely low VDD, however in the somewhat artificial
situation of zero process variations. Provided with home-made
accelerated noise simulation tools, the authors of [18], [20],
and [21] introduced variability as a global deterministic imbal-
ance between nMOS and pMOS transistors (asymmetrical
process corner), like [24]). Instead, we rely on the framework
presented in Section II, according to which we leverage on
Figure 2(b) to select the weakest SRAM bitcells prone to
dynamic instability.
Because of the CPU-time constraint, we have focused
the transient noise analyses on a few limit cases belong-
ing to the worst-case line δV1 = −δV2 (dashed line in
Figure 2(b)); the case 55 mV presented earlier in orange in
Figure 2(c) is one of them. From statistical considerations
involving a two-dimensional Gaussian variability distribu-
tion [6], we can show that such selected points lie within a
10 ppm-equiprobability circle [6], i.e. frequently encountered
among Monte-Carlo samples or fabricated bitcells. The choice
δV1 = −δV2 does not affect the generality of the presented
methodology and subsequent analyses. We emphasis that,
whereas we first observe the bit-flip mechanism in the time
domain, the expensive transient noise simulations are not part
of the proposed predictive methodology.
The two output node voltages are denoted v1(t) and v2(t)
(Figure 2(a)), respectively. The role of the two cross-coupled
inverters of Figure 2(a) is totally interchangeable. Having
adopted the convention δV1 = −δV2 > 0, the endangered
memory state is (v2, v1) = (X0, Y0) (see Figure 2). The exact
high and low logic levels X0 and Y0 depend on the process
variations affecting the particular bitcell (see again Figure 2).
We have used the right initial data (v2(0), v1(0)) = (X0, Y0)
as the initial condition for all the transient experiments of the
retention operation (i.e. not the approximate (0, VDD) as [8],
which resulted in a short settling time of about 1 µs to reach
the actual steady state).
A. Observation and Analysis of the Bit-Flip Mechanism
One typical transient simulation of a bit-flip caused by
intrinsic transistor noise is shown in Figure 3(a) [8]. The
bit-flip mechanism in SRAM bitcells is better understood
within the mathematical formalism of nonlinear dynamical
systems [31], [32]. We call state vectors the pairs of voltages
(v2(t), v1(t)). The set of all the possible values of those
Fig. 3. (a) Transient simulation of a noise-induced bit flip (failure) in the 6T
SRAM bitcell in retention (Figure 2(a)). Adapted from [9]. (b) State trajectory
of the bit flip of (a) in the state space. The nominal and modified VTCs of
the inverters are shown in blue and green, respectively. The unidimensional
reaction coordinate ṽ is shown in violet. Illustrated case: same SRAM design
as Figure 2, with process variations δV1 = −δV2 = 55 mV [9]. Bandwidth
of the generated noise: fmax = 1 GHz (1t = 500 ps) [8].
vectors forms the state space [31]. The state trajectory,
obtained by plotting the state vectors at various times in the
state space, is depicted in Figure 3(b). The butterfly of the
affected SRAM bitcell is also represented in the state space in
order to locate the two stable steady states or points (X0, Y0)
and (X1, Y1), which slightly deviate from the nominal and
ideal (0, VDD) and (VDD, 0) due to process variations δV1
and δV2, and to emphasize the out-of-equilibrium behavior
of the system during the transient bit flip. To each stable state
is associated a stability region or region of attraction [32]
The stability boundary, or separatrix [32], which separates the
two stability regions, necessarily includes the saddle (unstable)
point (XM, YM).
At the beginning of the represented time segment, the two
node voltages v2(t) and v1(t) (defined in Figure 2(a)) fluctuate
quietly around the logic levels X0 and Y0, the data initially
retained by the SRAM bitcell. Starting from about 474.5 µs,
v2(t) gradually increases and v1(t) decreases due to hazardous
and simultaneous large voltage noise fluctuations. This process
goes against the deterministic regenerative property of the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
VAN BRANDT et al.: MODELING AND PREDICTING NOISE-INDUCED FAILURE RATES IN ULV SRAM BITCELLS 993
inverters, which in absence of continuous disturbance would
restore the logic levels X0 and Y0. Once v2(t) and v1(t)
have crossed specific thresholds, respectively XM and YM
(Figure 3(a)), i.e. (v2(t), v1(t)) has gone beyond the unstable
steady state (XM, YM) and thereby has crossed the separatrix
(Figure 3(b)), the two cross-coupled inverters enter in positive
feedback loop. (v2(t), v1(t)) falls in the region of attraction
of the other stable steady state, (X1, Y1), the bit flip becomes
highly likely and rapid as dictated by the natural dynamics
of the SRAM bitcell. The positive feedback makes the node
voltages vary almost exponentially [31] as we can observe
in Figure 3(a). This mode has sometimes been referred to as
“strong feedback mode” [31].
Formally, the T T F is the time taken by the state to cross
the separatrix for the last time, when the transition from
(X0, Y0) to (X1, Y1) is completed. Experimentally, we define
the completion of the state flip and we record the T T F when
v2(t) and v1(t) cross, corresponding to the logical switch
0 → 1; it can be noticed in Figure 3(a) that, at this stage,
crossing backward becomes unlikely due to the asymmetry of
the bitcell. Because of the fast exponential evolution of the
voltages beyond (XM, YM), the two definitions are consistent.
This T T F is a random variable for a given bitcell, which takes
a different value for each experiment carried out.
Although determining the exact shape of the full separatrix
(as addressed in [32]) is not required in this work, it is
important to understand that (XM, YM) is the threshold point.
If we assume, after observation of Figure 3 (other trajectories
simulated for other cases behaved similarly), that a bit flip
occurs according to the preferential direction given by the line
connecting the two nearby points (X0, Y0) and (XM, YM), the
necessary failure criterion is that v2(t) and v1(t) cross the
thresholds XM and YM, respectively. The largest the individual
distances 1X ≡ XM − X0 and 1Y ≡ Y1 −YM, the statistically
rarest the bit-flip event (at fixed noise intensity) and the most
robust the SRAM bitcell is. The deleterious effect of process
variability is to reduce the noise margins (like the SN M)
and, similarly, 1X and 1Y. This leads to short T T F. The
relevance of this hypothesis of unidimensional dynamics in
estimating the T T F, here phenomenologically observed, will
be further formalized and quantitatively justified in Section IV.
B. Simulation Parameters and CPU Time
Careful setting of the transient simulations parameters like
the generated noise bandwidth ( fmax), time step (1t), and
duration optimizes the CPU-time tradeoff while ensuring
accuracy [7]. Preliminary to transient simulations, we have
extracted, for each (δV1, δV2) case studies, the noise band-
width fp of the inverters in the closed-loop configuration
of Figure 2(a) (unlike [7] which suggested an open-loop
procedure). Such NOISE(AC) simulations and their impor-
tance in determining the noise intensities will be described in
Section IV. We make several important comments at this stage.
First of all, the two inverters may have significantly different
bandwidths (typically by a factor ≈ 2), because the input of
one is low (X0, close to 0) while the input of the other is high
(Y0, close to VDD). Secondly, the bandwidth decreases from
Fig. 4. Empirical histogram of the T T F, constructed from 1000 T T F real-
isations of transient noise simulations like Figure 3. The MT T F ≈ 0.56 ms
is indicated by the vertical dashed line. Solid line represents the theoretical
exponential distribution (2) with the empirical sample mean plugged into it.
Illustrated case: same as Figure 3. The bin width of 0.2 ms was chosen for
illustration but is not directly related to any simulation parameter.
about 100 MHz for the bitcell free of any process variation
down to a only few MHz for the largest δV1 = −δV2.
In order to take into account all contributing noise compo-
nents, we usually use as generated noise bandwidth fmax ≈
10· fp [7]. The fmax = 1 GHz used in [8] is thus an excessively
loose choice, computationally inefficient. To better optimise
the CPU-time tradeoff [7], we here use fmax = 50 MHz. The
maximum time step of the transient simulation (1t) is related
to fmax through 1t = 1/(2 fmax) [7].
Setting the appropriate duration of the transient simulation is
difficult for a highly asymmetrical bitcell, because the typically
measured T T F are not known and hardly guessed a priori.
As shown in previous work [7] and as will be illustrated in
Section VI, the MT T F metric evolves across several orders of
magnitude with SN M variations of a few mV. With the aim of
being able to observe longer T T F, corresponding to the right
tail of the T T F distribution [18] (also studied in the next
Section III-C), we ideally want the duration to exceed at least
10 · MT T F, approximately. This may require an iteratively
refined simulation plan. In practice and since we focus on the
shortest MT T F cases, we limit and set the duration of all the
transient experiments to 5 ms. Finally, let us mention that, for
each (δV1, δV2), we must perform 1000 repeated experiments
and record a bit flip occurring at a random T T F for each
of them, to guarantee the statistical accuracy of the empirical
MT T F estimator (relative standard error of the mean is 3 %).
Let us mention that, despite this finely optimised set of
parameters, we still end up with a huge CPU time of a few
hours per single bit-flip experiments and of three days to go
through four selected δV1 = −δV2 variability cases. This,
despite the use of a high-performance work station and parallel
multi-core computing. Though, the whole orange crown of
Figure 2(b) should be covered by massive transient noise sim-
ulations in order to estimate all the MT T F and to evaluate (1).
Without accelerator or semi-analytical framework, this would
take several weeks or months of computation, prohibiting the
naive brute-force approach.
C. Distribution of the Time to Failure
Using the 1000 recorded realisations for each variability
case, we can empirically construct the probability density
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
994 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 3, MARCH 2025
function (PDF) of the random variable T T F as an histogram
(depicted in Figure 4). In agreement with the theory of
Markovian bistable system [33], the distribution is found to
be exponential:
fT T F (T T F) =
1
MT T F
exp

−
T T F
MT T F

, (2)
like [19, Fig. 11]. The authors of [18, Fig. 6] found, instead,
a log-normal distribution. This could be an artefact of their
iterative threshold-crossing algorithm, according to [19].
Importantly, the theoretical PDF (2) is entirely characterized
by one single parameter: the mean, i.e. the MT T F whose
estimation is the purpose of the present paper. Within the
usual notations in probability theory, λ = 1/MT T F [33].
In particular, the standard deviation of the T T F is nothing
but the MT T F too. Thus, the MT T F alone contains all the
information about the statistics of the noise-induced failures,
which are rare events. For a given MT T F (e.g. the process
variations are known and fixed), the probability (1) can be
explicitly evaluated from (2):
P(T T F < retention time) = 1 − exp

−
retention time
MT T F

.
(3)
Equation (3) clearly highlights the relevance of the MT T F
metric, compared to the typical retention time of the SRAM.
The left tail of the T T F distribution corresponds to the
shortest MT T F, unacceptable when smaller than the retention
time, as (3) quantifies in probability.
This said, we emphasize that the demanding part of the reli-
ability analysis is the estimation of the MT T F, for some given
process variations ((δV1, δV2) selected from Figure 2(b)), to
be eventually plugged into (2) or (3). Subtly, MT T F varies
from one bitcell to another due to process variations and hence
should be itself thought as a random variable within a sample
space made of a large number of bitcells.
IV. STOCHASTIC NONLINEAR DYNAMICAL MODELING
An SRAM bitcell in retention is undriven, i.e. isolated
from peripheral circuitry (except for the leakage currents
through the access transistors, which are taken into account
in our study). It can therefore, generally, be assimilated to
an autonomous stochastic nonlinear dynamical system, whose
modeling is the purpose of this section.
A. Two-Dimensional Stochastic State-Space Model
1) Nodal Analysis of the SRAM Bitcell: We reasonably
assume that the state of the system is fully determined by the
node voltages v1(t) and v2(t) (as indicated in Figure 2(a)).
The set of coupled nonlinear differential equations governing
the dynamics, i.e. the time evolution of v1(t) and v2(t), results
from the application of Kirchhoff current law at both nodes:

C22(v2, v1) C21(v2, v1)
C12(v2, v1) C11(v2, v1)
 
dv2/ dt
dv1/ dt

=

I2(v2, v1)
I1(v2, v1)

+

in,2(t)
in,1(t)

. (4)
The stochastic differential algebraic equation (4) is under-
stood in Itô’ sense, consistently with [25]. The importance and
the relevance of this convention is discussed in more detail
below.
The general model (4) can be obtained from a modified
nodal analysis of the circuit of Figure 2(a), taking into account
the intrinsic capacitances and the random noise sources of the
MOS transistors. I2(v2, v1) denotes the static component of
the current flowing out of Inverter 2, a nonlinear function of
v2 and v1 through the vGS and vDS of the MOS transistors.
It also incorporates the contribution of the leakage of the
access transistor.
All the dynamic currents of the transistors have been
regrouped in the form Ci j dvj / dt, as included in the left side
of (4). For instance, C22 may be thought as the sum of the
output capacitance of Inverter 2 and the input capacitance
of Inverter 1 referred to the ground. The capacitive coupling
between input and output of each inverter comes from the
gate-to-drain capacitances of the transistors, embedded in C12
and C21. Most generally, all the intrinsic capacitances depend
on the instantaneous voltages and are nonlinear. Extracting
them from SPICE simulations is neither trivial nor practical,
nor even useful for our purposes as will be explained below.
It is, however, important to recognise the role of the capacitive
currents in determining SRAM bitcell dynamics by relating the
voltage variations to currents.
The noise is intrinsic to all the transistors (including the
access). In (4), all the individual noise contributions are
collected into single parallel-current sources in,2(t) and in,1(t).
The white thermal noise intensities (i.e. the variances of in,2(t)
and in,1(t)) do vary with (v2, v1) in general, because the MOS
transistors are nonlinear dissipative devices [34].
In former work [31, eq. (2)-(3)], single constant output
node capacitance was assumed: C22 = C11 = C = constant,
together with C21 = C12 = 0. Subsequently simplified and
inaccurate analytical transistor and inverter models were used.
Moreover, only deterministic pulse noise were considered as
disturbance in(t) in [31], inappropriate in modeling the thermal
noise. The accelerated thermal noise simulator of [18] and [19]
assume constant Ci j . In the present work, we instead rely
on a general reformulation of (4) as a stochastic state-space
representation, characterizable without approximation from
conventional SPICE simulations.
2) State-Space Representation: Equation (4) can be com-
pactly rewritten in matrix form:
C(v)
dv
dt
= I(v) + in(t) (5)
denoting v = (v2, v1)⊺. The matrix C is diagonally dominant
because the load capacitances C22 and C11 are substantially
larger than the coupling capacitances C21 and C12. This
ensures det C = C22C11 − C21C12 > 0 as C22C11 ≫ C21C12,
i.e. the matrix C is known to be invertible. We may thus
formally transform (5) into
dv
dt
= C(v)−1
I(v) + C(v)−1
in(t)
≡ h(v) + σ(v)w(t). (6)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
VAN BRANDT et al.: MODELING AND PREDICTING NOISE-INDUCED FAILURE RATES IN ULV SRAM BITCELLS 995
We refer to (6) as the (stochastic) state-space representation
of the system [25]. h(v) is a two-dimensional (2D) drift
vector field, further analyzed here below. The vector w(t) =
(w1(t), w2(t)) contains two independent (since generated by
different devices) white noises of unit power spectral density
(PSD); σ(v) is the square diffusion matrix, non-diagonal as a
consequence of the capacitive coupling involved in (6) through
the C(v)−1. The σ(v) matrix will be extensively explained
thereafter, at the light of dedicated SPICE extractions.
Mathematically, a continuous-time white noise w(t) of infi-
nite bandwidth does not rigorously exist, because its variance
is infinite. Only the integral of a white noise, i.e. a Wiener
process (or Brownian noise) W(t) =
R t
0 w(t) dt, is soundly
defined [35]. This is why some authors [25], [36] prefer to
adopt the more rigorous notation of stochastic differential
equation (SDE): dv = h(v) dt + σ(v) dW(t). Written as (6),
the stochastic state-space model is a (vectorial) nonlinear
Langevin equation. It may only be formally interpreted as an
SDE by adopting an interpretation rule for stochastic integral
calculus [37], such as Itô or Stratonovich’s scheme [36]. The
question is relevant because the SRAM bitcell exhibits a non-
linear behavior and the noise intensity σ(v), modulated by the
state v, is not constant. As widely discussed elsewhere [36],
[37], the two formulations imply, for a given physical sys-
tem, a different function h(v) but lead to the same solution
(statistical distribution of v(t)). Previous works dedicated to
electronic circuit modeling [35], [38] suggest, however, that
Itô’s interpretation follows naturally from conventional for-
mulation like (4) and (6) and is especially consistent with the
SPICE implementation of transient noise simulations. Thus, all
through this paper, SDE like (6) must be understood in Itô’s
sense as assumed in [25] when performing stochastic calculus.
3) SPICE Characterization of the Drift: If the noise term
vanishes in (6), the evolution of v(t) is only dictated by the
drift field h(v):
dv
dt
= h(v). (7)
The interpretation is that, in the theoretical absence of noise,
the state trajectory follows the natural “deterministic” dynam-
ics of the silent cross-coupled inverters. As explained earlier
in Section III-A, their regenerative action brings (v2(t), v1(t))
to either (X0, Y0) or (X1, Y1) depending on the initial state.
Equation (7) provides a straightforward tool to extract h(v)
from conventional noiseless transient simulations (TRAN in
SPICE). For this purpose, we use a uniform grid in the state
space of Figure 3(b) as initial conditions. We record the evo-
lutions of the different trajectories (v2(t), v1(t)) (Figure 5(a))
and compute the two time derivatives dv2/ dt and dv1/ dt
numerically (the two scalar components of (7)). A discretised
h(v) is finally obtained by mapping the vectors dv/ dt and
v(t). It is depicted in Figure 5(b) as a vector field, with a
zoom on the region relevant for bit-flip analysis.
Figure 5(a) shows the usual characteristics of a bistable
system. The two stable steady states (X0, Y0) or (X1, Y1)
attract, from all directions, the trajectories in their respec-
tive basin of attraction. The unstable steady state (XM, YM)
exhibits a typical saddle-point behavior [39]. It is repulsive
Fig. 5. (a) Simulated deterministic (v2(t), v1(t)) trajectories in the state
space, starting from uniformly gridded initial conditions. The stable steady
states (X0, Y0) and (X1, Y1) (valley points) are attractive. The unstable
steady state (XM, YM) (saddle point) is repulsive along its manifold closely
approximated by the straight line parametrised by ṽ (in violet), and attractive
in the orthogonal direction (separatrix). (b) Two-dimensional drift field h, with
a zoom on the stable steady state (X0, Y0) weakened by process variability.
The intensity of h (i.e. arrow size) in the orthogonal direction tends to quickly
push (v2(t), v1(t)) toward the ṽ axis (shown in violet), which supports the
observation of the time-scale separation and the underlying assumption of
reduction of dimensionality. Illustrated case: same as Figure 3.
along its unstable manifold, which coincides with the stable
manifold of (X0, Y0). The heteroclinic orbit from (X0, Y0) to
(X1, Y1) [40] is roughly the ṽ straight line connecting them
(parametrised by ṽ in violet in Figure 3(b)). The orbit is,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
996 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 3, MARCH 2025
in the region between (X0, Y0) and (XM, YM), contained in
the stable manifold of (X0, Y0) and in the unstable manifold
of (XM, YM). The unstable steady state (XM, YM) is attractive
along its stable manifold, corresponding to the more or less
straight separatrix [32] in the orthogonal direction.
More specific to the SRAM bitcell and useful for our pur-
poses is the observation of a time-scale separation: whatever
the exact initial condition, the trajectory rapidly converges, in a
very short time, toward the heteroclinic orbit (ṽ straight line
connecting (X0, Y0) and (XM, YM) in Figures 3(b) and 5(b)).
Then, the evolution toward either attractive steady state along
this orbit is slower.
Those notions of velocity and time are more easily appreci-
ated in Figure 5(b). Outside the wing of the butterfly, the drift
vector field points almost perpendicularly toward the ṽ line,
with large arrows translating high velocity and very short time
constant. Along the unstable manifold of (XM, YM), the tiny
arrows show that the unidimensional dynamics in ṽ is slow
and hence is expected to dominate the transition time. It is
possible to make those observations more quantitative, at least
near the steady states. One may for instance linearize (7) near
the stable point v0
dv
dt
≈
dh
dv v=v0
(v − v0) ≡ A(v − v0), (8)
since h(v0) = 0 by definition, and to compute the eigendecom-
position of the Jacobian matrix A, i.e. calculate the eigenvalues
and eigenvectors to diagonalize it: A = V DV−1. The time
constants of the linearized system in the orthogonal directions
are the inverse of the purely real eigenvalues contained in D:
D =

−1/τ0,⊥ 0
0 −1/τ0,ṽ

. (9)
The negative sign of the eigenvalues indicates the stability,
attractiveness of the steady state v0. For the case illustrated
throughout the text, we find τ0,⊥ ≈ 10 ns much shorter than
τ0,ṽ ≈ 70 ns. Last but not least, we find that the eigenvector
associated to the eigenvalue −1/τ0,ṽ (slow time constant)
closely matches the direction of the straight line connecting
(X0, Y0) and (XM, YM) whose unit vector is
ṽ =

XM − X0
1ṽ
YM − Y0
1ṽ
⊺
, (10)
with
1ṽ =
p
(XM − X0)2 + (Y0 − YM)2
=
p
1X2 + 1Y2. (11)
We say that the eigenvectors span the stable linear space,
which is locally tangent to the manifolds of the steady
state [40].
A similar analysis near the unstable point leads to the
same conclusion, except that the eigenvalue associated to ṽ is
positive: +1/τM,ṽ, indicating the repulsiveness of this steady
state along its unstable manifold. In the intermediate region
between (X0, Y0) and (XM, YM), the magnitudes of the drift
field arrows (Figure 5) makes the time-scale separation of the
slow dynamics along ṽ and the fast one along the orthogonal
directions even more valid.
Fig. 6. Power spectral densities of the node voltages (a) v2 (gray) and (b) v1
(red) obtained from NOISE(AC) simulations of the circuit of Figure 2(a),
here around the stable steady state (v2, v1) = (X0, Y0). The individual
contribution of each inverter (plus the access transistor connected to its output)
is extracted separately by disabling the noise (NONOISE command in SPICE)
of the other inverter-transistor pair (then said silent). For a given node (e.g.
v2 in (a)), they are thus two configurations: in solid line, the dominant
noise contribution from the driving inverter (e.g. Inverter 2); in dashed
line, the smaller (yet non negligible) contribution of the load inverter (e.g.
Inverter 1). Illustrated case: same as Figure 3. (c) and (d) Characterization of
σ(X0, Y0) through the separate extraction of the four σ2
i j : σ2
22 = 3872 V2 s−1;
σ2
21 = 336 V2 s−1; σ2
11 = 1957 V2 s−1; σ2
12 = 614 V2 s−1. Similar simula-
tions were performed around the unstable steady state to get σ(XM, YM)
(not shown): σ2
22 = 1705 V2 s−1; σ2
21 = 271 V2 s−1; σ2
11 = 1320 V2 s−1;
σ2
12 = 301 V2 s−1. Extracted infinitesimal variances of 1D white noise of (19)
at steady states: σ2
0 = 910 V2 s−1 (stable) and σ2
M = 565 V2 s−1 (unstable).
While the two-dimensional drift was extracted and depicted
in Figure 5(b) for illustrative purposes, as well as to validate
the hypothesis of time-scale separation and unidimensional
dynamics, it will not be used to predict the MT T F. Instead,
we will rely on the reduced unidimensional model presented
in Section IV-B.
4) SPICE Characterization of the Noise: We now explain
how to characterise σ(v) in the noise term of the SDE (6).
First of all, let us emphasize that the noise can only be
inferred, from fluctuations of the observables v2 and v1 at the
steady states of the circuit, i.e. not at any arbitrary (v2, v1)
of the state space. This problem was generally referred to as
“hidden stochasticity” in [25], as encountered in many physical
systems. Our goal is thus to extract σ(X0, Y0) and σ(XM, YM),
i.e. four quantities for each steady state (either 0 or M):
σ ≡

σ22 σ21
σ12 σ11

. (12)
From (6) we develop, for instance, the equation of dv2/ dt:
dv2
dt
= h2(v2, v1) + σ22w2(t) + σ21w1(t). (13)
Equation (13) clearly shows that v2(t) receives two inde-
pendent noise contributions: the dominant σ22w2(t) from its
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
VAN BRANDT et al.: MODELING AND PREDICTING NOISE-INDUCED FAILURE RATES IN ULV SRAM BITCELLS 997
driving Inverter 2; the smaller σ21w1(t) from the load Inverter
1. An important ingredient is that we are going to extract σ22
and σ21 separately from two different SPICE simulations by
disabling the noise of the other inverter (NONOISE command
in SPICE). For instance, if Inverter 1 (as well as the access
transistor connected to its output) is silent, (13) becomes
dv2
dt
= h2(v2, v1) + σ22w2(t), (14)
i.e. reduces to a scalar nonlinear Langevin equation with one
single white noise.
Previous works [8], [9] attempted to subsequently extract
the infinitesimal variance of the white noise (σ2
22 in (14)) by
assimilating the SRAM bitcell to a linear RC circuit near the
steady state. Under this single-pole assumption, σ2
22 relates to
the integrated voltage noise power
σ2
v2
=
Z ∞
0
Sv2 ( f ) d f , (15)
according to [9]:
σ2
22 = 4π fp,22 σ2
v2
(16)
where fp,22 would be the fitted value of the only presumed
dominant pole of Sv2 ( f ). In passing, we would like to point
out that, for device modeling and SPICE simulations, PSD
like Sv2 ( f ) are, by convention, one-sided, i.e. only defined and
integrated over positive frequencies to retrieve the noise power
as in (15). At first sight of the voltage noise PSD extracted
from NOISE(AC) simulations (Figures 6(a) and 6(b)), the
RC low-pass-filter assumption, whose signature is a first-order
transfer function with a dominant pole, seems to be fairly
well-founded. However, the method (16) has turned out to
be very sensitive to slight perturbations of the PSD attributed
to higher-order poles and zeros introduced by the various
capacitances of the SRAM bitcell. The usage of (16) should
thus be avoided.
Fortunately, it is possible to directly relate σ2
22 to the
high-frequency behavior of the PSD Sv2 ( f ), as explained
below:
σ2
22 =
1
2
(2π f ∗
)2
Sv2 ( f ∗
) (Inv. 1 silent). (17)
The f ∗ selected for the extraction is a sufficiently high
frequency where f 2Sv2 ( f ) (corresponding, within constants,
to the one-sided PSD of the output current noise) is nearly
flat (e.g. 1 GHz in Figures 6(c) and 6(d)). Equation (17) is
trivial for an RC circuit, and can be justified to be valid more
generally.
The key ingredient is to relate Sv2 ( f ), the PSD of v2(t),
to the one-sided PSD of the white noise σ22w2(t), which
is 2σ2
22. Near the steady state, v2(t) may be regarded as a
first-order Markov process resulting from the filtering of the
white noise σ22w2(t) by the system (13) (yet with h2(v2, v1)
linearized). The PSD is then given by [41, Section II-
D,eq. (34)]. For a high frequency beyond the dominant pole
of the linearised system, i.e. f ∗ ≫ fp,22, Sv2 ( f ∗) converges
to the PSD of the Wiener process W2(t) =
R t
0 σ22w2(t) dt,
which can be shown to be (2σ2
22)/(2π f ∗)2 (see [41, eq. (36)]
or [42, eq. (7)]). Isolating σ2
22 finally leads to (17).
Fig. 7. (a) Extracted deterministic drift as appears in (19), which derives
from (b) quasi potential U(ṽ) = −
R ṽ
0 h(ṽ′) dṽ′. The near-stable-steady-state
((X0, Y0), full blue dot) approximations inherent to [23] and [26]’s formulas
are shown (dashed red line). Eyring-Kramers formula also exploits the
behavior near the unstable point ((XM, YM), open blue dot and dashed brown
curve). Illustrated case: same as Figure 3. 1ṽ = 34.5 mV.
Intuitively, in high frequency, the dynamics h2(v2, v1) is
ineffective in varying v2(t) compared to the white noise,
whose intensity is thereby contained in the tail of Sv2 ( f ). The
(2π f ∗)2 factor in (17) results from the integral relationship
between v2(t) and σ22w2(t).
The three other σ2
i j are extracted similarly, as illustrated in
Figures 6(c) and 6(d) (the numerical values both at the stable
and unstable steady states are provided in the caption). This
procedure to characterise σ(X0, Y0) and σ(XM, YM) is fun-
damental in the MT T F prediction methodology, since those
quantities will come into play in the closed-form analytical
formulas.
B. Reduced Unidimensional Stochastic Model
Upon observation of transient experiments like Figure 3
(other trajectories simulated for other cases showed similar
behavior) and following the argument of time-scale separa-
tion supported by the previous section (Figure 5), it seems
reasonable to reduce the dimensionality of the system (4).
To this end, we introduce an unidimensional (1D) coordinate ṽ
(previously shown in violet in Figures 3(b) and 5), constructed
by affine transformation of (v2, v1) obtained by orthogonal
projection of the 2D state vector v on the ṽ defined in (10):
ṽ = ṽ⊺
· v
≡
XM − X0
1ṽ
· v2 +
YM − Y0
1ṽ
· v1, (18)
where YM −Y0 < 0 and 1ṽ is the Euclidean distance between
(X0, Y0) and (XM, YM), as defined earlier in (11).
This is equivalent to studying the nonlinear SRAM bitcell
dynamics in the main direction ṽ dominating the T T F,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
998 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 3, MARCH 2025
modelled by the scalar Langevin equation, assuming a first-
order dynamics [9]:
dṽ
dt
= h(ṽ) + σ(ṽ)w(t). (19)
Equation (19) may be thought as formally describing a non-
linear RC circuit, i.e. an overdamped single-state system
with drift-diffusion dynamics [25]. We refer to (19) to as
the unidimensional stochastic model of the SRAM bitcell [9],
as a special case of single-state nonlinear bistable system [25].
Below, we explain how h(ṽ) and σ are characterized from the
SPICE simulations presented in Section IV-A.
1) Characterization of h(ṽ): The function h(ṽ) (in V s−1),
determining the natural dynamics of the 1D system in absence
of noise, absorbs the nonlinearities of both the resistive and
capacitive components of the SRAM bitcell. It can be cheaply
and unambiguously extracted from a noiseless transient simu-
lation (TRAN in SPICE, similarly to its 2D field counterpart in
Section IV-A). The procedure goes as follows [9]: 1) starting
from an initial condition (v2(0), v1(0)) = (XM − ϵ, YM + ϵ);
the deterministic evolution of (v2(t), v1(t)) toward (X0, Y0)
is recorded; 2) ṽ(t) is calculated through (18); 3) dṽ/ dt is
computed numerically and mapped to ṽ(t) to provide h(ṽ)
between 0 and 1ṽ (depicted in Figure 7(a)). Again, this
extraction is nothing but a special case, one single trajectory
of Figure 5(b) originating from (XM −ϵ, YM +ϵ). In 1D, drift
h(ṽ) may always be thought as deriving from a scalar quasi
potential U(ṽ) [39] (extracted and represented on [0, 1ṽ] in
Figure 7(b)):
h(ṽ) ≡ −
dU
dṽ
⇐⇒ U(ṽ) − U(0) = −
Z ṽ
0
h(ṽ′
) dṽ′
. (20)
The stable steady states (notably the fragile ṽ = 0) corresponds
to the valleys of U(ṽ), whereas the hill characterises the unsta-
ble point (ṽ = 1ṽ, labelled M). The quasi potential landscape
directly relates to the steady-state occupation probability (e.g.
[20], [21]) through a Boltzmann relation.
2) Characterization of σ(ṽ): In (19), σ(ṽ)w(t) is the ther-
mal noise term, σ2(ṽ) being the intensity, or infinitesimal
variance, or variance per unit time (i.e. in V2 s−1) and w(t) the
white Gaussian noise process (in s−1/2) [9] of unit two-sided
PSD (i.e. the one-sided PSD of w(t) is 2, dimensionless).
The meaning to be attributed to the notion of “infinites-
imal variance” is the following: Var{
R t
0 σw(t) dt} = σ2t,
i.e. Var{
R t
0 σw(t) dt} is proportional to the time window.
An example is the variance of a white current noise (e.g.
physically generated within a CMOS inverter) integrated on
an lossless capacitance [43].
As mentioned in Section IV-A, the noise can only be
inferred, in our setup, at the steady states of the circuit.
Consequently, σ(ṽ) is, at best, known in ṽ = 0 and ṽ = 1ṽ,
where we respectively denote it σ0 and σM. Most previous
analytical formulas coarsely assumes that σ2(ṽ) is constant,
i.e. that it does not vary with ṽ throughout the bit flip
(e.g. assumed equals to σ2
0 ). Finer prediction would rely on
the knowledge of both σ2
0 and σ2
M as will be reviewed in
Section V.
The σ (evaluated at either steady states) of (19) relates to the
matrix σ of (6), whose four entries have been extracted from
NOISE(AC) simulations according to Figure 6. To establish
the link, we first note from (6) and (18) that
dṽ
dt
=
d(ṽ⊺ · v)
dt
= ṽ⊺
·
dv
dt
= ṽ⊺
· h(v) + ṽ⊺
σw(t). (21)
By identification with (19), we find
σw(t) = ṽ⊺
σ(v)w(t), (22)
or, written in terms of white noise variance,
σ2
= ṽ⊺
σσ⊺
ṽ
=

XM−X0
1ṽ
YM−Y0
1ṽ
 
σ22 σ21
σ12 σ11
 
σ22 σ12
σ21 σ11
 XM−X0
1ṽ
YM−Y0
1ṽ
!
. (23)
Equation (23) is used to calculate σ2
0 and σ2
M from the
previously extracted quantities.
V. APPROXIMATE CLOSED-FORM PREDICTION FORMULAS
Now characterized, the unidimensional stochastic
model (19) points to the hope of analytically predicting
the MT T F. There are, however, two obstacles that should
not be overlooked: (i) the SDE (19) is nonlinear through
h(ṽ) (Figure 7(a)), and any attempt of linearization is
expected to result in significant discrepancies, as will be
evidenced; (ii) even if the parameters of (19) have been
accurately characterized, including the noise, deducing a
(semi-)analytical general formula for the MT T F from (19)
is not a straightforward mathematical task. We will therefore
draw on literature from various scientific fields.
Let us first mention our preliminary work [9]. A partially
empirical estimate of the MT T F was obtained by efficiently
simulating trajectories of ṽ(t) from the SDE (19), in a Monte-
Carlo fashion. Euler–Maruyama method [44], a dedicated
numerical integration scheme, was used. For each ṽ(t) trace,
the T T F corresponds to twice the first time to reach 1ṽ,
since at the top of the hill (Figure 7(b)) the state can still flip
left or right with probability 1/2. Although attractive in CPU
time (reduced to barely a few minutes compared to the three
days of transient noise simulations in SPICE), the accuracy
of this attempt was quite low due to the incorrect constant-
σ assumption. Moreover, such empirical approach, based
on repeated trials, does not offer an insightful closed-form
formula for the MT T F.
A. Near-Stable-Steady-State Approximate Formulas
Our proceedings [8], [9] already pointed out the severe
inaccuracy of some analytical formulas [23], [26] that rely on
a linearization of the SRAM bitcell dynamics, h(ṽ) in (19).
We review them in the present section.
1) First-Passage Time of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process:
Translating the definition of Section III-A in 1D, the T T F
as the time taken by ṽ(t) to, starting from 0, exceed 1ṽ
for the last time before successfully transitioning to the other
stable point. The mean T T F (MT T F) is twice the mean first
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
VAN BRANDT et al.: MODELING AND PREDICTING NOISE-INDUCED FAILURE RATES IN ULV SRAM BITCELLS 999
passage time (FPT), which is the mean time to reach 1ṽ for
the first time starting from 0 [25]; the factor 2 accounts for
the probability 1/2 of falling left or right when reaching the
unstable point at 1ṽ.
A closed-form solution of such FPT problem exists, unfor-
tunately only for the special case of linearized drift term
h(ṽ) ≈ −
1
τ0
ṽ(t) (24)
(dashed red line in Figure 7(a)), with
1
τ0
= −
dh
dṽ
(0) =
d2U
dṽ2
(0), (25)
the time constant of the 1D system linearized at ṽ = 0. The
ṽ defined by (19) and (24) is called an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process. By construction, the τ0 defined in (25) is the τ0,ṽ
found in (9) when searching for the eigenvalues of the Jacobian
matrix of the drift field of the 2D system.
Nobile [26] has rigorously solved the FPT problem of an
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, leading to [26, (6a)]:
MT T F ≈ 2 τ0

√
π
Z 1ṽ/(σ0
√
τ0)
0
du exp

u2

+
Z 1ṽ/(σ0
√
τ0)
0
du exp

u2

erf(u)

. (26)
2) Kish’s Formula: Kish [23] proposed a simplified Rice
formula for the mean frequency of crossing (1/MT T F in our
notations) a given threshold voltage (1ṽ) by a Gaussian noise
process (as ṽ(t) is roughly assumed) [23, (8)]. Kish’s formula
in integral form [23, (8)] diverges when applied to the PSD
of the output voltage noise of an inverter (see, for instance,
Figures 6(a) and 6(b)). It is most often used (notably [24, (4)])
in a simplified form [23, (9)] supposing band ( fp = 1/(2πτ0))-
limited white (thermal) noise, written with the notations of this
paper as:
1
MT T F
=
2
√
3
exp

−
1
2
1ṽ
σṽ
2

fp
∝ exp

−
1ṽ2/(2τ0)
σ2
ṽ /τ0

1
τ0
. (27)
Despite lack of detailed proof, we understand (27) as lin-
earizing the true SRAM bitcell dynamics around the stable
steady state to reduce it to an RC-like circuit with Gaussian
voltage distribution. It can be regarded as a simplified version
of (26) [25].
Within the exponential, 1ṽ2/(2τ0) is the value of the
quasi-potential barrier evaluated at the unstable point (ṽ = 1ṽ)
under the coarse harmonic (parabolic) potential approximation
(dashed red line in Figure 7(b)), equivalent to linearized
drift (24). Remembering that for an RC circuit we have
τ0 = RC and σ2
ṽ = kT/C, (27) finally highlights a Maxwell-
Boltzmann probability [9]:
1/MT T F ∝ exp(−1E/kT )/τ0, with1E = C1ṽ2
/2.
B. Eyring-Kramers Formulas
The calculation of transition rates (1/MT T F) is a clas-
sical problem in chemical physics. The old Eyring-Kramers
formula [45] is valid for a wide class of nonlinear bistable sys-
tems but requires a constant white noise intensity. Our recently
published extended formula [25] overcomes this limitation.
1) Classical Eyring-Kramers Formula: Constant σ2:
The near-stable-steady-state approximation inherent to [23]
and [26] is twofold: the deterministic drift is linearized around
ṽ = 0 only; the noise is assumed constant and also extracted
at ṽ = 0 only. As shown numerically in [25], drastic accuracy
improvement is achieved by Eyring-Kramers formula [45],
revisited in [39] and applied to the SRAM bitcell model (19)
in [25]:
MT T F ≈ 2π
√
τ0 τM exp

U(1ṽ) − U(0)
1
2 σ2

. (28)
Equation (28) also takes into account the drift (quasi-potential)
behavior of the system near the unstable point (dashed brown
lines in Figure 7).
We explain the newly introduced quantities in (28).
U(1ṽ) − U(0) is the true quasi-potential barrier (computed
according to (20) and indicated in Figure 7(b)) whose crossing
by the random diffusion process leads to a bit flip.
1
τM
=
dh
dṽ
(1ṽ) =
d2U
dṽ2
(1ṽ) (29)
is the time constant of the system linearized at the unstable
(and repulsive) point (ṽ = 1ṽ), straightforwardly computed
from either h(ṽ) or U(ṽ). Hence, a new effective time con-
stant of the diffusion process, defined as a geometrical mean
τ ≡
√
τ0τM, appears in the pre-factor of (28). It somehow
incorporates the drift behavior in both the near stable- and
unstable-steady-state regions.
Unfortunately, the classical formula (28) still assumes con-
stant noise variance σ2. The numerical values, for instance
those provided for the illustrated case in the caption of
Figure 6, show that σ0 can be significantly different from σM,
i.e. that the noise intensity does significantly vary along the
bit-flip trajectory. This behavior, for nonlinear devices, was
expected from physical considerations [34]. No observation
or theoretical argument justifies favouring either σ = σ0 or
σ = σM for our purposes. Thus, these two exclusive choices
could be inaccurate, when attempting to apply (28) to predict
the MT T F in SRAM bitcells.
2) Extended Eyring-Kramers Formula: σ0 and σM: In [25],
we have addressed the situation of “hidden stochasticity”, i.e.
when σ(ṽ) is only known in 0 and 1ṽ and hidden outside the
steady states. The main result is
MT T F ≈ 2π
√
τ0 τM
σ0
σM
exp

U(1ṽ)
1
2 σ2
M

exp

− 2

1
σ2
M
−
1
σ2
0

U

,
(30)
where
U ≡
1
1ṽ
Z 1ṽ
0
U(ṽ′
) dṽ′
. (31)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1000 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 3, MARCH 2025
Fig. 8. Flow chart of the proposed methodology, aimed at predicting the
mean time to failure due to the noise in ULV SRAM bitcells affected by
process variations (assumed given, as selected from Figure 2(b)).
Equation (30) does incorporate the noise behavior near both
the stable (σ0) and the unstable (σM) steady states. It is
somewhat similar to the classical formula (28) where σ = σM
would be used, yet with additional factors:
• σ0/σM naturally appears following Itô’s rule for stochastic
calculus [25]. It is expected to have a negligible impact
on the order of magnitude of the MT T F, compared to
the exponentials.
• The factor
exp

− 2

1
σ2
M
−
1
σ2
0

U

(32)
may be regarded as correcting for the fact that the noise
variance is not constant throughout the state flip. It is
unity only when σ(ṽ) = σ0 = σM = constant. If
σM < σ0, the argument within the exponential is positive
and the factor is larger than 1, thereby compensating
the excessive first exponential involving a too small σ.
Conversely, if σM > σ0, the correcting factor is smaller
than 1.
The complete methodology, aimed at predicting the MT T F
in a given SRAM bitcell at a given VDD affected by process
variations, from the characterization of the stochastic model
based on SPICE simulations to the extractions of the different
quantities involved in the analytical extended Eyring-Kramers
formula (30), has been summarized as a flow chart in Figure 8.
Fig. 9. MT T F empirically estimated from transient noise simulations
(averaged over 1000 experiments like Figure 3(a), for each point) compared
to the predictions of the analytical formulas.
VI. PREDICTION OF THE MT T F: RESULTS
AND DISCUSSION
In Figure 9, we assess the accuracy of the different
closed-form formulas for the MT T F, taking the massive
and finely-tuned transient noise simulations of Section III
as reference golden values. We exploit the unidimensional
stochastic model (19) of the SRAM bitcell to insightfully point
out and explain the origins of the discrepancies.
Reference values for the MT T F were obtained by
averaging 1000 T T F (which leads to histograms like
Figure 4), extracted from SPICE transient noise simulations
like Figure 3(a) [8] for several severe process variations
δV1 = −δV2 = 55 to 58 mV (blue pentagrams in Figure 9).
As previously observed in [7], the metric spans across orders
of magnitude: it drops from half a ms (as provided earlier
in Figure 4). at δV1 = −δV2 = 55 mV to a only few µs at
58 mV. This exponential trend has been explained earlier by
the reduction of the SN M with δV , from 5 mV to 1 mV [8],
and could have been anticipated from the various approximate
formulas such as (27) or (28).
The low reported MT T F values confirm that, while they
were considered functional at time zero (SN M > 0), all these
bitcells weakened by static variations are prone to dynamic
instability and should be classified as defective when the
typical retention time of the SRAM is for example longer
than 1 ms in the ULP system application. An extrapolation
of the robust (as validated with transient noise simulations)
predictions (30) of Figure 9 to smaller process variations,
e.g. δV1 = −δV2 = 50 mV corresponding to an SN M =
10 mV, estimates MT T F greater than 1 − 10 s. Because this
value is larger than any practical retention time, it justifies a
posteriori the choice of SN M = 10 mV as first guess to define
the boundary of the orange crown in Figure 2(b). Similarly,
no bit flip would ever be observed or practically measured
on silicon in SRAM bitcells in conditions closer to nominal
(e.g. VDD = 1 V).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
VAN BRANDT et al.: MODELING AND PREDICTING NOISE-INDUCED FAILURE RATES IN ULV SRAM BITCELLS 1001
We first review the predictions of (26) and (27), respectively
depicted in red and orange in Figure 9. As extensively dis-
cussed in previous publications [8], [9], [25], they totally fail
in accurately predicting the MT T F, the discrepancy reaching
two to three orders of magnitude for larger MT T F. This
comes from the near-stable-steady-state linearization from
which these formulas derive. In particular, the approxima-
tion (24) is inappropriate in describing the nonlinear SRAM
dynamics (Figure 7(a)). Ornstein–Uhlenbeck model assumes
a linear drift term −ṽ/τ0 all along the trajectory and thereby
severely overestimates the recall effect to ṽ = 0. In particular,
it gives non-zero drift term −1ṽ/τ0 at ṽ = 1ṽ while it
is exactly zero within the full nonlinear model (19) (see
Figure 7(a)). Equivalently, through the parabolic approxima-
tion, Kish overestimates the quasi-potential barrier that the
process ṽ(t) must cross Figure 7(b)):
1
2
1
τ0
1ṽ2
≫ U(1ṽ) − U(0). (33)
This clearly questions the failure rate predictions of [24], based
on Kish formula.
The major improvement brought by the different Eyring-
Kramers formula of Section V-B is the careful treatment of
the drift h(ṽ). The classical formula (28) requires one single
constant noise variance σ2. Depending on whether σ0 (light
brown in Figure 9) or σM (dark brown in Figure 9) is used, the
noise is either over- or under-estimated, causing the MT T F to
be either under- or over-estimated compared to transient noise
simulations. Interestingly, we can observe in Figure 9 that the
gap between the σ0- and σM-based predictions widens for the
case of more moderate process variations, i.e. the variations
of σ2(ṽ) with the state of the SRAM bitcell becomes more
significant. This is because the steady states (X0, Y0) and
(XM, YM) becomes further apart (larger 1ṽ range), so that
the influence of the change in bias point from 0 to M gets
substantial.
This is why we recommend harnessing the extended
law (30) to predict the MT T F in SRAM bitcells with
much greater accuracy. It was indeed constructed to rem-
edy these important shortcomings of the former analytical
approaches [25]. It achieves, at least for the investigated cases,
a remarkable accuracy: compared to SPICE transient noise
simulations the error remains below 20 %, which is outstand-
ing for a metric spanning across orders of magnitude. This
combines with a major reduction of the CPU time: from three
days (Section III) to a few minutes for four (δV1, δV2) cases,
accounting for the cheap deterministic SPICE simulations
required to calibrate the stochastic model and to apply the
closed-form formula for the MT T F. We then estimate to
two days the time required to estimate the MT T F of all
the cases in the orange crown of Figure 2(b). A benchmark
with the few previous accelerated simulation frameworks [18],
[19], [20], [21] is complicated for two reasons: the authors
did not report the CPU time; more importantly, the extracted
T T F was never compared to reliable reference values as
provided by general SPICE transient noise simulations in our
work.
VII. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
ULV SRAM arrays are essential blocks of ULP systems.
The data retention is threatened by two random phenomena
affecting the MOS transistors and thus the SRAM bitcell
functionality: static process variations and dynamic intrinsic
noise. Whereas most simulation and modeling efforts have
been rightly focused on variability, we have shown that,
because the noise immunity of the bitcells severely degrades
with large process variations, dynamic instability comes as a
non-negligible additional concern when the typical retention
time is long. An efficient variability-aware noise simulation
framework, compatible with industrial SPICE tools and com-
pact models, is therefore needed. We have exploited a 2D
variability representation, mapping of the situation at time
zero, to select cases to be treated in priority for noise analysis.
Because the brute-force approach that would combine
Monte-Carlo simulations with transient noise analyses is unaf-
fordable in CPU time, we have developed and presented
an hybrid semi-analytical methodology aimed at accurately
predicting the MT T F, compatible with industrial transistor
compact models and simulation tools. The different steps
are summarized in Figure 8. SRAM bitcells in retention are
autonomous stochastic nonlinear dynamical systems, for which
stochastic model faithful to its strongly nonlinear behavior
accounting for varying white noise intensity can be fully
characterized from a limited number of fast conventional
SPICE simulations. This allows to finally apply the extended
Eyring-Kramers formula to estimate the MT T F with a rela-
tive error 20 %, remarkably.
As a perspective, we should mention that, toward com-
prehensive reliability assessment, the contribution of the
low-frequency noise (which includes both 1/f noise and
random telegraph noise [46], [47]), in addition to process
variations and thermal noise, remains to be investigated. The
1/f noise, yet present in our transient noise simulations,
was negligible in the bandwidth of interest. The 1/f corner
can indeed be discretely noticed near 1 kHz in Figures 6(a)
and 6(b). This is because, in this work, the PSDs of the noise
are evaluated in nominal conditions, i.e. ignoring the device-
to-device variability of the statistics of the low-frequency noise
itself [46], [47]. The effect of the average 1/f turns out to be
negligible compared to the thermal noise in the simulated noise
bandwidth. This conclusion is very likely to be revised by con-
sidering the variations of the 1/f (e.g. at 3 or even 6σ as made
in [47] when studying analog circuits like comparators and
oscillators). Thus, in a longer-term perspective, the stochastic
model and analytical prediction tools will have to be enriched
with colored and non-Gaussian noise sources. By providing a
quantitative answer to the timely scientific question of whether
the intrinsic noise sources substantially inflate the SRAM cell
failure probability, optimal ULV design margins (i.e. lowering
the supply voltage below the 300 mV limits reported in [2])
can be achieved.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Bol, G. de Streel, and D. Flandre, “Can we connect trillions of IoT
sensors in a sustainable way? A technology/circuit perspective (Invited),”
in Proc. IEEE SOI-3D-Subthreshold Microelectron. Technol. Unified
Conf. (S S), Oct. 2015, pp. 1–3.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1002 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 3, MARCH 2025
[2] M. Alioto, “Ultra-low power VLSI circuit design demystified and
explained: A tutorial,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 59,
no. 1, pp. 3–29, Jan. 2012.
[3] A. P. Chandrakasan et al., “Technologies for ultradynamic voltage
scaling,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 98, no. 2, pp. 191–214, Feb. 2010.
[4] D. Bol et al., “SleepRunner: A 28-nm FDSOI ULP cortex-M0 MCU with
ULL SRAM and UFBR PVT compensation for 2.6–3.6-µW/DMIPS
40–80-MHz active mode and 131-nW/kB fully retentive deep-sleep
mode,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 2256–2269,
Jul. 2021.
[5] R. G. Dreslinski, M. Wieckowski, D. Blaauw, D. Sylvester, and
T. Mudge, “Near-threshold computing: Reclaiming Moore’s law through
energy efficient integrated circuits,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 98, no. 2,
pp. 253–266, Feb. 2010.
[6] L. Van Brandt, R. Saeidi, D. Bol, and D. Flandre, “Accurate and insight-
ful closed-form prediction of subthreshold SRAM hold failure rate,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 2767–2780,
Jul. 2022.
[7] L. Van Brandt, F. Silveira, J.-C. Delvenne, and D. Flandre, “On noise-
induced transient bit flips in subthreshold SRAM,” Solid-State Electron.,
vol. 208, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 108715.
[8] L. V. Brandt, J. Delvenne, and D. Flandre, “Variability-aware noise-
induced dynamic instability of ultra-low-voltage SRAM bitcells,” in
Proc. IEEE LASCAS, Punta del Este, Uruguay, Feb. 2024, pp. 1–5.
[9] L. Van Brandt, D. Flandre, and J.-C. Delvenne, “Stochastic nonlinear
dynamical modelling of SRAM bitcells in retention mode,” in Proc.
IEEE EDTM, Bengaluru, India, Mar. 2024, pp. 1–3.
[10] D. Bol, R. Ambroise, D. Flandre, and J.-D. Legat, “Interests and
limitations of technology scaling for subthreshold logic,” IEEE Trans.
Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 1508–1519,
Oct. 2009.
[11] N. Zheng and P. Mazumder, “Modeling and mitigation of static noise
margin variation in subthreshold SRAM cells,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 2726–2736, Oct. 2017.
[12] T.-H. Kim, J. Liu, J. Keane, and C. H. Kim, “A high-density subthreshold
SRAM with data-independent bitline leakage and virtual ground replica
scheme,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers,
Feb. 2007, pp. 330–606.
[13] B. H. Calhoun and A. P. Chandrakasan, “A 256-kb 65-nm sub-threshold
SRAM design for ultra-low-voltage operation,” IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 680–688, Mar. 2007.
[14] J. P. Kulkarni, K. Kim, and K. Roy, “A 160 mV robust Schmitt trigger
based subthreshold SRAM,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 42, no. 10,
pp. 2303–2313, Oct. 2007.
[15] I. J. Chang, J.-J. Kim, S. P. Park, and K. Roy, “A 32 kb 10T sub-threshold
SRAM array with bit-interleaving and differential read scheme in 90 nm
CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 650–658,
Feb. 2009.
[16] B. Vanhoof and W. Dehaene, “SRAM with stability monitoring and body
bias tuning for biomedical applications,” IEEE Solid-State Circuits Lett.,
vol. 5, pp. 29–32, 2022.
[17] B. Vanhoof and W. Dehaene, “A 1 MHz 256 kb ultra low power
memory macro for biomedical recording applications in 22 nm FD-SOI
using FECC to enable data retention down to 170 mV supply voltage,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 299–305,
Jan. 2024.
[18] E. Rezaei, M. Donato, W. R. Patterson, A. Zaslavsky, and R. I. Bahar,
“Fundamental thermal limits on data retention in low-voltage CMOS
latches and SRAM,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 20, no. 3,
pp. 488–497, Sep. 2020.
[19] M. Donato, R. I. Bahar, W. R. Patterson, and A. Zaslavsky, “A sub-
threshold noise transient simulator based on integrated random telegraph
and thermal noise modeling,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr.
Circuits Syst., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 643–656, Mar. 2018.
[20] P. Jannaty, F. C. Sabou, R. I. Bahar, J. Mundy, W. R. Patterson, and
A. Zaslavsky, “Full two-dimensional Markov chain analysis of thermal
soft errors in subthreshold nanoscale CMOS devices,” IEEE Trans.
Device Mater. Rel., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 50–59, Mar. 2011.
[21] P. Jannaty et al., “Shot-noise-induced failure in nanoscale flip-flops—
Part I: Numerical framework,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 59,
no. 3, pp. 800–806, Jan. 2012.
[22] N. Freitas, K. Proesmans, and M. Esposito, “Reliability and entropy
production in nonequilibrium electronic memories,” Phys. Rev. E, Stat.
Phys. Plasmas Fluids Relat. Interdiscip. Top., vol. 105, no. 3, Mar. 2022,
Art. no. 034107.
[23] L. B. Kish, “End of Moore’s law: Thermal (noise) death of integration
in micro and nano electronics,” Phys. Lett. A, vol. 305, nos. 3–4,
pp. 144–149, Dec. 2002.
[24] F. Veirano, F. Silveira, and L. Naviner, “Minimum operating voltage
due to intrinsic noise in subthreshold digital logic in nanoscale CMOS,”
J. Low Power Electron., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 74–81, Mar. 2016.
[25] L. Van Brandt and J.-C. Delvenne, “Predicting state transitions in
autonomous nonlinear bistable systems with hidden stochasticity,” IEEE
Control Syst. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 850–855, 2024.
[26] A. G. Nobile, L. M. Ricciardi, and L. Sacerdote, “Exponential trends
of Ornstein–Uhlenbeck first-passage-time densities,” J. Appl. Probab.,
vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 360–369, Jun. 1985.
[27] M. Alioto, “Understanding DC behavior of subthreshold CMOS logic
through closed-form analysis,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers,
vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1597–1607, Jul. 2010.
[28] E. Seevinck, F. J. List, and J. Lohstroh, “Static-noise margin analysis
of MOS SRAM cells,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. SSC-22, no. 5,
pp. 748–754, Oct. 1987.
[29] J. Lohstroh, “Static and dynamic noise margins of logic circuits,” IEEE
J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. SSC-14, no. 3, pp. 591–598, Jun. 1979.
[30] P. Bolcato and R. Poujois, “A new approach for noise simulation in
transient analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS),
vol. 2, May 1992, pp. 887–890.
[31] B. Zhang, A. Arapostathis, S. Nassif, and M. Orshansky, “Analytical
modeling of SRAM dynamic stability,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf.
Comput. Aided Design, Nov. 2006, pp. 315–322.
[32] W. Dong, P. Li, and G. M. Huang, “SRAM dynamic stability: Theory,
variability and analysis,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Comput.-Aided
Design, Nov. 2008, pp. 378–385.
[33] A. Papoulis, Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes
(McGraw-Hill Series in Electrical Engineering). New York, NY, USA:
McGraw-Hill, 1991.
[34] L. Van Brandt and J.-C. Delvenne, “Noise–dissipation relation for non-
linear electronic circuits,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 122, no. 26, Jun. 2023,
Art. no. 263507.
[35] A. Demir, E. W. Y. Liu, and A. L. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, “Time-
domain non-Monte Carlo noise simulation for nonlinear dynamic circuits
with arbitrary excitations,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr.
Circuits Syst., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 493–505, May 1996.
[36] M. Bonnin, F. L. Traversa, and F. Bonani, “Colored noise in oscillators.
Phase-amplitude analysis and a method to avoid the Itô-Stratonovich
dilemma,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 66, no. 10,
pp. 3917–3927, Oct. 2019.
[37] N. G. Van Kampen, “Itô versus Stratonovich,” J. Stat. Phys., vol. 24,
pp. 175–187, Jan. 1981.
[38] R. Winkler, “Stochastic differential algebraic equations of index 1 and
applications in circuit simulation,” J. Comput. Appl. Math., vol. 163,
no. 2, pp. 435–463, Feb. 2004.
[39] N. Berglund, “Kramers’ law: Validity, derivations and generalisations,”
2011, arXiv:1106.5799.
[40] J. Guckenheimer and P. Holmes, Nonlinear Oscillations, Dynamical
Systems, and Bifurcations of Vector Field, vol. 42. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2013.
[41] N. J. Kasdin, “Discrete simulation of colored noise and stochastic
processes and 1/fα power law noise generation,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 83,
no. 5, pp. 802–827, May 1995.
[42] D. Krapf, E. Marinari, R. Metzler, G. Oshanin, X. Xu, and A. Squarcini,
“Power spectral density of a single Brownian trajectory: What one can
and cannot learn from it,” New J. Phys., vol. 20, no. 2, Feb. 2018,
Art. no. 023029.
[43] A. A. Abidi, “Phase noise and jitter in CMOS ring oscillators,” IEEE
J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 1803–1816, Aug. 2006.
[44] D. J. Higham, “An algorithmic introduction to numerical simulation of
stochastic differential equations,” SIAM Rev., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 525–546,
Jan. 2001.
[45] H. A. Kramers, “Brownian motion in a field of force and the diffusion
model of chemical reactions,” Physica, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 284–304,
Apr. 1940.
[46] G. Wirth, “Time-dependent random threshold voltage variation due to
random telegraph noise,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 68, no. 1,
pp. 17–23, Jan. 2021.
[47] M. B. da Silva, G. I. Wirth, H. P. Tuinhout, A. Zegers-van Duijnhoven,
and A. J. Scholten, “Random telegraph noise in analog CMOS circuits,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 2229–2242,
Jun. 2023.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ Catholique de Louvain/UCL. Downloaded on March 10,2025 at 09:15:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
